by the .ame aut11,or 
Mapter Lutli 
(Nobel Prize novel) 
Siddhartha 
HERMANN HESSE 
GERTRUDE 
translated from the \ ~ ... ' i 
German "Gertrud" by 
HILDA ROSNEll \ .,,. ., ........ 
\ 
PETER OWEN VISION PRESS 
London 
Publilhed jointly L'y 
PETER. OWEN LIMITED , 
50 ,Old Brampton Road 
London S.W.7 and 
VISION PRESS LIMITED 
Canard Houae 74A Regent 
Strttt Loudon W,1 
Made and Printed in Great Britain by 
JOHN BUCKLE (PRINTERS) LIMITED 
Theatre Plain Great Yannoutli Norfolk 
I 
When I consider my life objectively, it does not seem 
particularly happy. Yet I cannot really call it unhappy, 
despite all my ntistakes. After all, it is quite foolish to 
talk. about happiness and unhappiness, for it seems to 
me that I would not exchange the unhappiest days of my 
life fbr all the happy ones. 
When a person has arrived at a sta~ in life when he 
accepts the inevitable with equanimity, when he has 
tasted ftOOd and bad to the full, and has carved out for 
hin~ .. ell :ilc.ngside his external hfe, an inner, more real 
and not f01 tuitous existence. then it seems my life has 
not ~ empty and worthless. Even if my ~xternal 
destiny has unfolded itself as it does with everyone, 
inevitably rd as decreed by the gods, my inner life has 
been my own work, with its joys and bitterness, and I, 
alone, hold myself respon1ible for it. 
At dmes, when I was younger, I wanted to be a poet. 
If I were, I would not resist the temptation of tracing 
back my life into the dim shadows of my childhood and 
to the fondly preserved sources of my earliest memories: 
But the posse.sion is far too precious and holy for me 
to sf>il in any way. All I will say about my childhood 
is that it was good and happy. I was giten the freedom 
to discover my own inclinations and talents, to create 
my inmost pleasures and sorrows myself and to regard 
5 
the (uture as the hope and produa. of my own streugth 
and not as something fas,hioned by a strange power from 
above. So I passed unnoticed through the schools as an 
or~inary, little tklented, but qniet scholar who was finally 
left a~one, as I did not seem to be subjected to ,any strong 
influences. 
When I was about six or seven years old, I realised that 
among all invisible powers, I was destined to be most 
strongly affected and doriiinated by music. From that 
time I had my own world, my sanctuan and my heaven 
that no-one could take away from me or belittle, and that 
I did not wish to share with anyone. I was a musician 
although I did not learn to plav anr instrument liefore 
my twelfth year and did not think that 1 would later 
wish to earn my living by music. 
That i• how matters have been ever since, without 
anything being essentially changed, and that is why on 
looking back on my life it does not seem varied and 
many-sided, but from the beginning it has been tuned to 
one key-note and l:lirected solely to one star. Whether 
things went well or badly with me, my inner life remained 
unchanged. I might sail for long periods across foreign 
seas, not touching a manuscript-book or an instrument, 
and yet at every moment there would be a melody in 
my l>lood and on my lips, a be~t and rhythm in the 
drawing of breath and life. However eagerly I sought 
salvation, oblivion and deliverance in many other way•. 
however much I thirsted for God, understanding and 
peace, I always found them in mu•ic alone. It dio not 
need to be Beethoven or Bach: it has been a continual 
consolation to me and a justification for all life that there 
is music in the world, that one can at times be deeply 
6 
movpi by rhythms \nd pervaded by harmonies. , Oh, 
music I A melody occurs to you; you sing it silently, 
inwardly only; you steep your being ln it; it takes ~ses­
sion of all your strength Ind emotions,-and during the 
time it lives in you, it effaces all. that is fortuitou!, e;il, 
coarsr an<fsad in you; it brings the world intd harmony 
with you, it makes burdens light and gives wings to the 
benumbed! The melody of a folk-song can do all that. 
And first of all the harmony! tor each pleasing harmony 
of clearly combirw<l notes, perhaps in one chord, charms 
and delights the spirit, and the feeling is intensified with 
each additional note; it can at times fill the heart with 
joy Jftld make it tlCIIlble with l>liss as no other sensual 
pleasure can ~o. 
Of all the conceptions of pure bliss that peop~e and 
poets have dreamt about, it seemed to me that the one 
of Ji •• e1.:,1g to the harmony of thc spheres was the highest 
and most intu1se. That is where my dearest and brightest 
dreams have ranged-to hear for the duration of a heart­
beat the universe and the totality of life in its mysterious, 
innat<' ha"' ,011y. Alas! how is it that life can be so 
confusing and out of tune and false, how can there be 
lies, evil, envy and bate amongst people, when the 
shortc:st song and most simple piece of music preach 
that heaven is revealed in the purity, harmony and close 
play of clearly sounded notci, ! And how can I upbraid 
people and grow angry whel\ I, myself, with all the good 
will in the world have not been able to make a song and 
any iweet music out of my life! Inwardly, I am really 
aware of an imperative urge, of a thirsting desire for one 
pur~. pleasiTig, essentially holv sound and its,fading away, 
but my days are full of mischance and discord and 
7 
wh&ever I turn and wherever I slrike, there is n~er a 
true and clear echo. 
But no more; I will tel\ you the story. When I consider 
fof whom I am covering thhe pages and who has, in 
fact, \0 ~uch power over me that she can draw a con­
fession &om me and penetrate my loneliness, I , must 
give the name of a beloved woman, who is not only 
bounti to me by a large slice of experience and de•tiny, 
but who also stands abov~ everything for me like a •tar 
and •acred symbol. 
8 
II 
It was only during my last year or two at r.chool when 
all my school-fellows were belinning to talk about their 
future careers t1Nit I also began to think about mine. 
The possibflity of making music my profession and means 
of livelihood was really far removed from my thoughts; 
yet 1 could rot taink of any other career that would 
make me happy. I had no objection to commerce or 
other professions suggested by my father; I just felt 
indifferent towards them. Perhaps it was because my 
tollc:.tut'> w~re 'lO proud of the r.areers of their choice 
that an inwa1u voice also told me that it was good and 
right to 'make a career of that which filled my thqughts 
and alone gavr P\e real pleasure. It proved useful that I 
had learned ·"' play tbe violin since I was twelve and 
had made some progress under a good teacher. The 
more my father resisted and worried at the thought of 
his only son embarking upon the uncertain career of an 
artist, the stronger grew my will in the face of his opposi­
tion, and the teacher, who liked me, strongly supported 
my wish. In the end, my father sbbmitted, but just to 
test my endurance and in the hope that I would change 
my Jnind, he required me to stay on another year at 
sc.hool. I endured this with rrasonablc patience and ._ •. h_. . d . b e1urmg t II ume my esare ttame even stronger. 
During the last year at school I fell in love for the 
9 
fint time with a pretty young girl who was in our circle 
of friends. Without seeing her often and also without 
strongly desiring her, I su'ffered and enjoyed the emotions 
of first love as in a dream. l>uring this period when I 
w~ thinking about my music as much as about my 
f \ • b~loved and could not sleep at nights through .great 
excittment, I consciously retained for the first time 
melodies which occurred to me. They were two short 
songs and I tried to write t.'nem down. This made me feel 
bashful but gave me acute pleasure, aq,d I almost forgot 
my youthful pangs of love. Meantime, I learned that m}' 
beloved took singing lessons and I was very eabrer to hear 
her sing. After some months my wish was fulfilled al an 
evening gathering at my parents' house. Tne pretty girl 
was asked to sing. She resisted strongly but finally had to 
give in and I waited with great excitement. A gentleman 
accompanied her on our humble little piano; he played 
a few bars and she began. Oh, she sang badly, very badly, 
and while she was still singing, my dismay and torment 
changed into sympathy then into humour, and from then 
on I was free from this love. 
I was patient and not altogether indolent, but I was 
not a good sch~lar, and during my last year at ,chool I 
made very little effort. This was not due to la1iness and 
my infatuation, but to a state of youthful day-dreaming 
and indifference, a dullness of sem,cs and intellect that 
was only now and then suddenly and pow~ully pierttd 
when one of the wonderful hours of premature creative 
desire enveloped me like ether. I then felt a'i if I 't'ere 
surrounded by a rarified, crystal-clear atmosphere im 
which dreain•ng and vegetating were not ~ible 1an:t 
where all my senses were sharpened and on the alert. 
10 
Little was produca, during those hours, perhaps ten 
melodies and the beginnings of harmony, but I will never 
forget the rarified almost cold ·atmosphere of. that time 
and the intense concentration required 1.0 give a ntelody 
the correct emotion and' interpretation and not just \he 
rough co1'ception o( it. I was not satisfied -witlT these 
small results and did not consider them to be of any 
great value, but it was clear 10 me that there would never 
be anything as desirable and important in my life as the 
return of such hours of clarity and creativeness. 
At the same uine I also had periods of day-dreaming 
when I improvised on the violin and enjoyed the intoxi­
catien of fleeting i,npressions and exalted moods. I soon 
knew that tltis was not creativeness but ju11t playing and 
running riot, against which I had to guard. I also realised 
that it was one thing to indulge in day-dreaming and 
in'.ux;._.-.ting hours and another to wrestle strenuously and 
resolutely \\ 1th the secrets of form as if with fiends. I also 
partly realised at that time that true crcatiye power 
isolates one and de111and'i s<>mething that ha., to be sub­
tracted fr •m the enjoyment of life. 
At last I was free. My school-days were behind me. I 
had said good-bye to my parents and had begun a new 
life as a student at the School of Music in the capital. I 
commenced this new phase with great expectations and 
was convinced that I would be a good scholar at the 
Sc.hool of ~usic. However. this did not pro,•e to be the 
("ase. I ha difficulty in following the instruction in all 
dir~·tions. found the piano lessons which' I now had to 
tak! only a gr<'at trial, and I M><>n saw my whole course 
t>f\tudy !Icing me-like an unscalable mq_umain. I did 
not think of gi\ ing in, but I was disilJusioned and dis-
11 
concerted. I now saw that with ah. my modesty I had 
conaidered myself some kind of a genius and had c.-onuder­
ably underestimated the toils and di8icultiea encountered 
along' the path &o an art. Maa-eovei, my composing was 
seriously affected for I now only saw mountains of diffi­
culuea' and rules in the smalle.t exercise. I learned to 
mistrust my sensibilities entirely and no longer knew 
whether I possessed any talent. So I became resigned, 
humble and sad. I did my work very much as 1 would 
have done in an office or in another sfhere, diligently 
but without pleasure. 1 did not dare complain, least of 
all in the lerten that I sent home, but continued in 
secret disillusionment along the path .' had commenced 
and hoped to become at least a good violinilL. I practised 
continually and bore hard words and sarcasm ftom the 
teachers. l saw man) others whom I would not have 
believed capable of it, make progress easily and receive 
praise, and my goal became even rnore humble. For 
even with the violin things were not going so well that 
I could feel proud and perhaps think. of becoming a 
virtuoso. If I worked hard, it looked a'I if I might at 
least become a proficient violinist who could pla) a 
modest part in some small orchestra, without di•gracc 
and without honour, and earn my living by it. 
~ this period for which I had yearned so much and 
which had promised everything to me, was the only one 
in my life when I travelled along joyless paths abandoned 
hy the spirit of music and lived through days which had 
no meaning and rhythm. Where I had looked for pleaure, 
exaltation, radiance and beauty, 1 found only demahd11, 
rules, difficul\ies, tasks and trials. If a m-1.asical ilica 
occurred to me, it was either banal and imitative, or it 
u 
was apparently in contradiction with all the laws of 
music and had no value. So I said farewell to all my 
great hopes. I was one of thousaod1 .who had apprQached 
the art with youthful con\dence and ~ose powen ltad 
fallen short of his aspiration'I. 
This state of aR'ain lasted about three yean. I was 
now over twenty )C.trs old. I had apparently failed in 
my vocation and only continued along the path I had 
commenced out of a feelinitof 'ihame and duty. I did 
not know anyth;.pg more about music, only about finger­
exercises, difticult tasks, contradictions in the study of 
harmon}, and tedious piano le,;.,ons from a sarcastic 
teac'ber who1only~aw a waste of time in all my efforts. 
If the old ideal had not .,ecretly been alive in me, I 
could have enjoyed mysel£ during those ,ear11. I was free 
and had £riend11. I was a good-Jooking and health, young 
m.,n, the -.on of wealthy parents. I-or 'lhort periods I 
enjoyed .1.ll that; there were plea\ant days, ftirtation'i, 
carousing and holida\1,. But it Wlb not po1111ible for me 
to console-ln,-,elf in thi'i way, to la, :t\ide my obligations 
for ., sho1 L time ,md above all to enjoy my ,outh. With­
out rcall) knowing it, in ungu.1.rded hours I still loo1.ed 
longingly at the fallen star of <.reative art, and it was 
impo.,'i1blc for me to forget and 11tifte m, feelings of 
di1illu1,ionmc11t. Onh onc.e l\,lS I reallv succes11ful in 
doing \tl. 
It was the mo'it fooli.,h d.t) of m\ foolish ,outh. I wa1 
then pur11uing a girl-student stud,ing under the famou11 
,in~ng te.ic.her H. Both 'lhe and I were in a similar 
~icameit: i,he had anhed with great hopes, had 
tound strict teacher'!, wo1. .. unu\Cd to the wdt'1., and finalh 
even thought 11he w.1., going to lo'IC her ,oice She had a 
·~ 
light nature, flirted with her colleagues and knew how 
to infuriate us. She had the vivacious, gaudy type of 
beauty tha\ soon fades. 
This pretty gilt called Liddy continually captivated me 
with = ir,genuous coquetry whenever I waw her. I was 
never in love with her for long. Often I <"ompletely 
forgot her, but whenever I was with her, my infatuation 
for her returned. She plaved with mt· ai, she did with 
others, enticing me and enfoying her pow«-r, but she was 
only indulging in the i-eni,ual curiosity cl her youth. She 
was very pr• · .v, but onlv when she ,poke and moved, 
when she laughed with her deep warm voke, wht'n she 
danced or was ammed at the je.ilous! of ~er admil-en. 
\Vhenever I returned home from a party where I h.id 
seen her, I uhed to laugh at m,..elf and realio,e that it wafl 
impossible for a pcr11011 of my nature to be .eriousl) in 
love with this pleasant, light-hearted girl. Somctima, 
however, with a gesture or a friendlv whispered word, she 
was so successful in exdting me, that for half the nip;ht I 
would loiter with 'ardent feelings near the house where 
she lived. 
I was then going through a pha\C of wildness and 
half-enforced bravado. After da~• of depression and 
dullness, my }OUth demanded storm) emotion,; and exc.ite­
men"t and I went with some other companions of nn own 
age in search of divenion. We pa11,ed for jolJy, unruly, 
even dangerous rioten, whkh was untrue of me, and we 
enjoyed a doubtful but plea111ant hcrok rc.-putation with 
Liddy and her ,;mall circle. I low ru..in) of these Jrges 
could be attributc.-d to genuine )OUthfulnc\'i, and t\n": 
many were a ct.:sire tor forgetfulne\\, I cannot now decide, 
for I have long ago completel) outgrown those phases 
14 
and all extreme youthfulness. If I indulged"in exc:e11e1, 
I have since atoned for them. 
One winter's day when we were free, we 1'ent pn an 
excursion to the outskirts ~f the town. 'there were ~ht 
or ten yo'!ng people, amongst them Liddy and th$ee girl 
friends. We had toboggans with us, the u~ of which 
was still a source of childish pleasure to us, and we 
looked for good slides in the hilly distric.ts outside the 
town, on the roads and on the •slopes of fields. I remember 
that day very w,:11. It was extremely cold;' at times the 
sun would appear for about a quarter of an hour and 
there was a wonderful smell of snow in the strong air. 
The girls l~k.ed tlovely in their bright clothes against 
the white tiackground; the sharp air was intoxicating 
and the energetic exercise in the fresh air was delightful. 
0111 !:1•le party was in very high spirits; there was much 
familiaril~ ·•nd chaffing which was ano;wered with snow­
balls.and led to i,hort battles until we were all hot and 
cm·ered with snow. Then we had to stop a · while to 
recover o• t • eath before we began agam. A large snow­
castle wJ., built and besieged and ever} 110 often we 
tobogganned down the slopes of fields. 
At mid-day, when \\e were all extremely hungry as a 
result of our exercise, we looked for and found a village 
with a good inn; we cooled down, took po<ssession of the 
piano, sang, shouted, and ordered wine and~- Food 
was brought and enjoyed enormom,ly, and there was 
good wine in abundance. Afterwards the girls asked for 
colfc while we had liqueurs. There was such an uproar 
injhe lit~e room that we were entirely confused. I was 
with Liddy all the timt. who, in a graci"'1s mood, had 
chosen me for special favour that day. She was at her 
l!'i 
best in this atmosphere of merrymaking and noiae; her 
lovely eyes sparkled and ahe permitted many half-bold, 
half-qmid• endearments. A ~mr lf forfeits was com• 
mcpced in whidl the forfeiters were released after imita­
tin~ qpe of our teachers at the piano. but 1uany also 
through kisses, the number aaad quality of which were 
closely obseIVed. 
When we left the inn and set off home, in high spirits 
and with much noiiie. it "1,s still early afternoon but it 
was already growing a little dark. ~ again romped 
through the mow like care-free children. returning to 
town without haste in the gradually approaching eveping. 
I managed to remc1in by Liddy's sir!e a~ appointed 
myself her companion, not without opposition from the 
others. I drew her on to my toboggan and protected her 
to the best of my ability against the renewed attack" with 
snow balls. Finall), we were left alone; each girl found 
a male companion, and two ,oung men who were surplus 
joined forces with much c.haffing and mock belligeren<e. 
I had never been '10 excited an<l madly in love as I was 
at that time. Lidd} had taken my arm and allowed me 
to dr-aw her close to me a<1 we movrd along. She w,1s 
soon chattering awa}; then r,he became silent and, it 
appeared to me, c.ontent to be at my side. I felt very 
ardent and was determined to make the most of th1r, 
opportunity and at least maintc1in thi'i friendly, delight• 
fµl state of affairs ai. long ai. pos•ible. 
No-one lad am objection when I 'iuggesteci another 
detour shortl) before rec1ching the lown ,md \\e tu\ned 
on to a lovely road that ran high c1bove thr valle,-i9' 
a semi-circle,•rich in extensive vit.'Ws mer the valley, 
river and town which, in the dist~nce, was c1lready aglow 
16 
with rowa of bright lamps and thousands of re>1y lights. 
Liddy 1till hung on to my arm and let me talk, received 
my ardent advances with amusement .and yet seemed very 
excited herself. But when•1 tried to dr2W her gently to 
me and kiss her, she freed herself and moved aw~y. 
"Look,',. she cried, taking a deep breath,• "w: must 
toboggan down that field I Or are you afraid, my hero?" 
I looked down and was astonished for the slope was 
so steep that for the moment.9 I was really afraid at the 
thought of such J1 dangerous ride. . 
"Oh, no," I said quietly, "it is already far too dark.." 
She immediately began to mock and provoke me, called 
me \ coward ande said she would ride down the slope 
alone if I w!s too faint-hearted to wme with her. 
"We •hall overturn, of cour~," she said laughing, "but 
that '"' 1hr most amusing part of tobogganing." 
As •he prnvoked me so much, I h:ul an idea. 
"Li.ddy," I said softl)·, "we'll go. If we o,·erturn, you 
can rub snow over me, but if we c9111$! down all right, 
then I war. 11,y reward." 
She jus. ,aughed and s~t down on the toboggan. I 
looked at her face; it was bright and sparkling. I took. 
my place in the front, told her to hold tightly on to me 
and ·we set off. I felt her clasp me and cross her hands 
on my chest. I wanted to shout o,omething across to her 
but I could no longer do so The slope was so steep that 
I felt as if we were hurtling through the air. I immediateiy 
tried to put both feet on the ground in order to pull up 
or lven overturn £or suddenl}· I was terribly worried 
a~ut Liddy. However, it \\JS too late. The toboggan 
·whizzed utcontrollably c:!own the hill. I was only aware 
of a cold, biting mass of churned up snow in my face. 
17 
I heud Uddy cry out anxiously-then no more. There 
wa. a tremendous blow on my head as if &om a sledge­
hammer: •somewhei;e there was a severe pain. My last 
feeliJ\g was of being cold. l was relieved of the tumult and agitation which took. 
place •aftef the accident. For the others it wa~ a painful 
time. The) had heard Liddy shout out and tht-y laught-rl 
and teased from above in the darkneu. }'inallv, they 
realised that something w:fs wrong and climbed uref ully 
down to us. It took ,1 little while for thfm to sober do\\·i1 
and come t,. a realisation of the po'lition. Liddv w,h 
pale and halt nnconsciou'I, but quite unharmed; onl) 
her glov~ were torn and her delilat• white hand• •were 
a little bruised and bleeding. They carr!ed me away 
thinking I was dead. At a later date I looked in vain for 
the apple or pear tree into which the toboggdn had 
cra'Shed and broken m} bones. 
It was thought that I had concu•sion of the brain but 
matten were not quite so bad. My head and brain were 
indeed affected and it was a long time before I regained 
consciousness in the hospital, but the wound hc,dcd and 
my brain was unharmed. On the other hand, my left 
leg, which was broken in several placc'I, did not full} 
heal. Since that time I have been a cripple who can 
only walk with a limp, who can no longer stride out or 
even run and danc.e. My vouth wcti, thu• unexpectcdl) 
directed along a path to quieter region•, along whic.h I 
travelled, not without a feeling of ~hamc and resi'ltanre. 
But I did go along it and sometimes.it seems to me'Jhat 
I would not willingly have mis'ICd that eveninJ to~an, 
ride and iu cen.equences in my life. 
I confess that I think less about the broken leg than 
18 
about the other conaequenc;es of the accident, which were 
far happier. Whether it can be attributed to the accident, 
the shock and the glimpse into darkness, or .the long 
period of lying in bed, !eing quiet fer months• and 
thinking things over, the course of treatment prov~ 
beneficial t~ me. 
The beginning of that Jong period of lying in bed, say, 
the first week, has quite vanished from my memory. I 
was unconsciou a 1,rreat part of the time and even when 
I firially recovered full consciousness, I wa1 weak and 
listless. My mother arrived and every day sat faithfully 
beside my bed in the hospital. When I looked at her 
and \poke a few words, i,he seemed calm and almost 
cheerful, alt1lough I learned later that i,he was very 
worried .about me, not, indeed, for Ill) life-, but for my 
reason ~ometimes we chatted for a long time in the 
quieL liul<' hospital ward. Yet our relationship had 
never ,been very intimate. I had always been closer to 
my father. Sympathy on her part and gi:atitude on mine 
had made r. lJ\Ore understanding and inclined to draw 
closer, bm ifle had both waited too long and become 
accustomed to a mutual "laiser-faire" for the awakening 
affection to i,how itself iu our conversation. '\\'e were 
glad lo be together and left some things unspoken. She 
wa~ again my mother who !!o3W me lying ill and could 
care for me, and I saw her on<e again through a boy's 
eyes and for a time forgot <.,enthing else. To be sure, 
the old relationship was resumed later and we used to 
avoil talking much about this pe1iod of sickness for it 
-embarrassed \I!, both. 
c!radualry, I began to r,.alise m) position. and as I had 
recovered from the fever and seemed peaceful, the doctor 
19 
no longer kept it a secret from me that I would have a 
memento for good as a result of my fall. I saw my youth, 
which I had hardly yet consciously enjoyed, grievously 
cyt lhort and oimpoveris!ied!" I had plenty of time in 
wLich to realise the state of alfain as I was bed-ridden 
for anotht:r three months. 
I i:hen tried hard to conceive my position and visualise 
th~ shape of my future life, but I did not make much 
progress. Too much thinling was still not good for me. 
I soon became tired and sank into a. quiet reverie b) 
which nature protected. me from anxiety and despair 
and compelled me to rest in order to recover my health. 
The thought of my misfortune torme•ted me freqm:!ntly, 
often half through the night, without my c1btaining any 
solace. 
Then one night I awal..ened after a ft.-w houri. of peace­
ful slumber. It seemed to me that I had had a pleasant 
dream and I tried in vain to recall it. I felt remarkably 
well and at peace, as if all unplea'5ant things were sur­
mounted and behind me. And a'i I lay there thinking and 
felt light current• of health and relief pervade me, a 
melody <.ame to my lips almost without any sound. -I 
began to hum it and unexpectedly, music, which had w 
long been a stranger, came bacl.. to me like a '!ouddenly 
revealed star, and my heart beat to it• rhythm, and mv 
whole being blossomed and inhalt.-d new, pure air. It 
did not reach my consciou•ness; I ju•t felt its presence 
and it penetrated my being gently, as if melodious choir'5 
were singing Lo me in the disLance. 
With this inwardly refreshed feeling I fell asl~ep a~in. 
In the mornqig I was in a good humour and free fron1 
depression, whic.h I had not been for a long time. My 
•o 
mother noticed it and asked what was making me feel 
happy. I reflected a while and then said that I had not 
thought about my violin for a long time; then I.suddenly 
thought about it again a~d•it gave me pleasure. 
"But you will not be able to play for a long time yet," 
she said in-a somewhat worried tone. 
"That does not matter-also even if I never play 
again." 
She did not understand and I could not explain to her. 
But she noticed that things ltere going better with me 
and that no fieu8 lurked behind this unfounded cheer­
fulness. After a few days she c:,autiously mentioned the 
matter again. 
"How are fou progressing with your music? We have 
felt that you were tired of it and your father has spoken 
to your teachers about it. We do not want to persuade 
you lea:.t of all just now . . . but we do feel that if you 
have made a mistake and would rather give it up, )OU 
should do so and not continue out of a feeling of-defiance 
or shame. '":h1.t do you think?" · · 
I again , ,·.>ught about this period of isolation. I tried 
to tell my mother about my affairs and she seemed to 
understand. I thought I now saw my goal clearly again 
and I would not, at all events, run away from it but 
study right till the end. That ii; how things remained 
for the time being. In the depths of my soul where my 
mother could not penetrate, there wa,; sweet music. 
Whether or not I should now make an~ progress with 
the wolin, I could again hear the world round as if it 
werf artistically created and I knew that outside music 
l!hcl'e was·fio salvation for me. E,·cn if UJ.Y condition 
never permitted me to play the violin again, 1 would 
21 
resign myself to it. perhaps consider another career or 
even become a merchant; it was not so important. As a 
merchant. or anything else, I would not be any less 
sensitive to muaic or live andebreatbe lt"II through music. 
I \vould compose again I It was not, as I had said to my 
mothtt, die thought of m)' violin that made•me happy, 
but the intense desire to make music, to create. I again 
often felt the clear ,·ibrations of a rarified atmosphere, 
the intense com·entrationo0f ideas, as I did previom,ly in 
my best hours, and I also felt that bv the side of it, a 
crippled leg and other misfortunes we.e of little impor­
tance. 
From that time on I was \'ictorious.and however often 
since then ID}" desires have travelled inl> regions of 
physical fitness and yopthful pleasures, and however 
often I have hated and < uned my crippled state with 
bitterness and a deep sense of shame, it has not been 
beyond my power to bear this load: there has been some­
thing there to console and compensate me. 
Occasionally my.father came down to see me and. one 
day, as I continued to impro,·e, he took my mother home 
with him again. For the hrst few da\'S I felt rather lonely, 
and also rather ashamed that I had not talked more 
affectionately to my mother and taken more interest in 
her thoughts and rares. But my other emotion was so 
intense that these thoughts about good intentions and 
feelings of compassion receded into the background. 
Then unexpectedly someone came to visit me. who 
had not ventured to do so while mv mother wa,; lhere. 
It was Liddy. I was vc..-ry surprised ,to M'<' her. Fol the, 
first moment it did not enter my head that I 1'ad recetn1, 
been on dose terms with her and very mu<.h in love with 
,I.I 
her. She came in a state of great embarrassment, which 
she disguised very badly. She had been afraid of my 
mother and judgment against her for she knew she was 
responsible for my misf&rtune, and bnly gradually 
realised that things were not so bad, and that she was • • not really affected. She breathed freely again ~ut could 
not conceal a feeling of slight disappointment. The girl, 
despite her troublt-d conscience, had in her feminine 
heart been deeply e,r.cited about the whole business and 
at such a great ~isfortune. Sne even used the word 
"'tragic" several times, at which I could hardly conceal a 
smile. She had not really been prepared. to see me so 
cheefful and 'IO li¥1e concerned about my misfortune. 
She had had ~ in mind to ask. my forgiveness, the granting 
of which a'i her belm•ed would have given her tremendous 
satisfactioh, and at the dimax of thi, stirring scene she 
wo•.!~ !,J.ve triumphantly conc1uered my heart anew. 
Jt was ind~ed no small relief to the foolish girl to see 
me so•content<'d and to find hcnelf fr<'e ftnm all blame 
and accusation. Howev<'r, this relief did not make her 
feel happ• ,mJ the more her conscience was eased and 
her anxiety removed, the quieter and cooler did I see 
her become. Sub,equently, it hurt her not a little that 
I regarded her part in the affair as <10 slight, and indeed, 
even seemed to have forgotten it. I had quenched her 
apology and all the emotion and ruined the whole pretty 
scene. Despite my extreme politeness, she observed that 
I was no longer in Io,·e \\rith her, and that was the wont 
thiT\l of all. Even if I had lost my arms and legs, I 
• shcvitd stil\ have been .in admirer of hers, whom indeed 
:he did not love and who had never given her any 
pleasure, but if I had been wretchedly lovesick, it would ., 
have been a greater source of satisfaction to her~ That 
was not the case, as she ao well observed, and I saw the 
warmth 211d interes.t on the pretty face of the sympathetic 
sip-visitor gradually grow l&s and disappear. Aftrr an 
effuslve farewell, she finally went away and never came 
again altHough she faithfully promised to do so. 
However painful it was to me and however much it 
reflected on my power of judgment to see my previous 
infatuation sink into insignificance and become laugh­
able, the visit did, in fact, do me p. I was very 
surprised to sec thi~ attractive girl for the first time 
without pas,ion and without rose-coloured spectacles, 
and to realise that I had not known lwr at all. If someone 
had shown me the doll which I had embrafed aud loved 
when I was three yt"ars old, the lack of interest and 
change of feeling could not have surprised me-.nore than 
in this case, when I i.aw as a complete stranger this girl 
whom I had so strongly desired a few weeks earlier. 
From among the companions who were present at that 
Sunday outing in the winter, two visited me several times, 
but we found little to talk about. I saw how relieved 
they were when I improved, and I asked them not to 
bring me any more gifts. We did not mret ag-.tin later. 
It was a strange business and it made a sad and curious 
impression on me; everything that had belonged to me 
in these earlier yean of my life left me, wa~ alien and 
J01t to me. I suddenly saw how sad and artihcial my 
life had been during this period, for the loves, friends, 
habits and pleasures of these yean were discard~ lille 
badly fitting clothes. I parted from ·them without faine 
and all that .-emained was to wonder that 1•could hav~ 
endured them so long. 
I was surprised to receive another visitor to whom [ 
had never given a thought. One day, that strict and ironic 
gentleman, my piano teacher, came to see me •• Holding 
his walking-stick and we~fling gloves, he spoke id his 
usual sharr,, almost biting tones, C'alled the ill-fat~ 
toboggan-r1c:le "that women's ride business," afld by the 
tone of his words, seemed to take it quite for granted 
that ill-luck had ensued. All the same, it was remarkable 
that he had come, and he also proved, although he did 
not change his tone of voice, that he had not come with 
any bad intentio~s. but to tell me that despite my mis­
takes he considered me a pas.11ablc student. Hi11 colleague, 
the fiolin teacher,.was of the same opinion and they 
therefore ho~d I would soon return fit and well and 
give them pleasure. Although this speech almost sounded 
like an apology for previous harsh treatment, and was 
df'I•·. c. ·.:J in the same sharp tones, it was as sweet to me 
as a declMa: ion of love. I gratefully held out my hand 
to the-unpopular teacher and in order to sh,>w confidence 
in him, I tried to t>xplain the course of my life during 
these year· anu how my old attitude towards music was 
beginning to return. 
The p10fessor shook his head and whistled derish·ely. 
Thep he said: "You want to become a composer?" 
"If .possible," I said disheartened. 
"Well, I wi'.lh you luck. I thought )'OU would now 
resume practising with fresh enthusiasm, but if you want 
to compose, you don't, of course, need to do that." 
"qti, ! didn't mean that." 
":,,Vhat then? You know, when a music student is lazv 
and doesn'rlike hard work, he always takes 1'P composing. 
Anyone can do that and each one, of course, is a genius." 
15 
"I really don't mean that at all. Shall I become a 
pianist thel\ ?" 
.. No, piy dear friend, you could never become that­
but you could ,become a rc:t.iOnably good violinist." 
! .. J wish to do that, tool" 
.. 1 hope..you mean it. Well, I must not stay'any longer. 
Hope you will soon be better. Good-bye." 
'fhereupon he went away and left me with a feeling of 
amazement. I had thought very little about the return 
to my studies. I was still afraid things would be difficult 
and go wrong and that everything w:»uld be as it had 
been previously, but these thoughts did not remJ.in with 
me long, and it also seemed as if tlte surly prof611or's 
visit was well-meant and a ,ign of sinc-e1e'-good-will. 
After I had sufficiently recovered my health, it was 
intended that I should go away for a period of conval­
escence, but I preferred to wait until the long vacation. 
I wished to return to work immediately. I then exper­
ienced for the first time what an ai.tonishing effect a 
period of rest can. have, particularly a compul'IOr) one. 
I began my studies and practi\ing with mi\trust, but 
t"verytbing now went better than previomll, To be sure, 
I now fully realised that I would never become a virtuoso, 
but in mv present mood thi11 did not trouble me. 
Besides, matters were going well. In particular, the 
impenetrable undergrowth of mu&ic. theory, harmony and 
the study of c.ompo&ition had been tramformed into an 
a~ble, attrac.tive 1,r.mlen. I felt that the inroads and 
incursion,; which I mc1de during my lc&&0ns no 16Jiger 
defied all the rules and laws, but that through auiduous, 
study a narr9w but clearly dii,c: ernible path 'to freedon\ 
was revealed. There were indeed still hours and days 
26 
and nights when I seemed to be confronted by impen­
etrable barrien, and with a dred brain I flinched in the 
face of obstacles and pitfalls, but I did not .despair again 
and I saw the narrow padl become· clearer and diore 
accessible. 
On closing for the holidays at the end of -the term, 
the teacher of theory said to me, much to my surprise: 
.. You are the only student this year who really seems to 
understand something about music. If you ever compose 
anything, I ~hould like to see it." 
With these conJorting words ringing in my ears, I set 
off for my holidays. I had not been home for a long 
time,• and during tllc railway journey I again pictured 
my native pllce with affection, and conjured up a pies 
of half-forgotten memories of my childhood and early 
youth. My father was waiting for me at the station and 
wr-j, :·. e home in a cab. The following morning I 
already felt ,m urge to go for a walk through the old 
streets. 1-·or the first time I was overcome with a feeling 
of tragedy at my lost ,outhful htnes.-. It wa'i painful 
to me to :.i\rc to l<'an on a stick and limp with my 
crooked, rstttf leg along these lanes, where f'very corner 
reminded me of boyish games and past plearsures. I came 
back. home feeling dejected, and whoever I saw, and 
whose-ever voice I heard, and whatever I thought about, 
everything reminded mt• bitterlr of the past and mv 
crippled state. At the 'lame time, I was al'io unhappy 
because my mother was les" t•nthu'>ia'ltic than ever about 
my ,Jioice of career, although •he did not actuallv tell 
lllJ.e ,o. A 1~usidan who could make an appearance as a 
s1ender, erect virtuoso or an impressive-lookiag conductor, 
she might have conceded, but that a semi-cripple with 
17 
only moderate qualification ■ and a shy di■po■ition could 
bring himself to continue a■ a violinist was inconceivable 
to her. Jn this codnection ■he was supported by an old 
frielld who was a distant r(!lative. My father bad once 
f&rbidden her to come to the house, which caused her 
to concei,,e a violent dislike for him, although this did. 
not. keep her away for she often came to see my mother 
wtiile my father was at the ofli~e. She had never liked 
me and had hardly ever spoken to me since I was a 
young boy. She saw in my choice of career an unfortunate 
sign of degeneration and in my ac:ident an obvious 
punishment and the hand of Providence. 
In order to give me pleasure, myjathcr arrangtfd for 
me to be invited to play a solo in a conct'tt to be given 
by tl'e town's Music Society. But I felt I could not do 
so. I refused and retired for many days to the 11rnall 
room which I had occupied as a boy. J was particularly 
harassed by continual enquiries and the necessity to 
\tand talking so that I hardly ever went out. I then found 
myself looking ow of the window at the life in th<" street 
and at the school-children, and above all I looked at the 
young girls with unhappy longing. 
Haw could I ever hope to declare my love I<> a girl 
again, I thought I I 11hould always have.-10 OJtand outside, 
like at a dance, and look on, and never be taken 11eriomlv 
by girls, and if any were \erv friendly with me, it would 
be out of sympathy. Oh, I was more than sick of 
s:ympathyl 
As it was I could not rc.-main at home. My pqents 
also suffered considerably aOJ a remit of my cxt~emei 
melancholy ~'ld hardly raised anv objection Jhen I ask~ 
permission to r.et off immediatc.-ly on the long-planned 
.t8 
journey which my father had promised me. Later, my 
infirmity caused me to be creative, and at the same time 
destroyed my heart's wishes and hopes, but I )¥Ver felt 
my weakness and deformity_, keenly as I iid then, when 
the sight of every healthy young man and every pretty 
woman deptessed and hurt me. I slowly grew usdl to 
my stick and to the limp until it hardly disturbed me 
any more, and with the passing of the yean I remained 
conscious of my injury without bitterness and accepted 
it with resignation or humour. 
Fortunately, I fas able to travel alone and did not 
need to wait fof anything. The thought of any compan­
ion Wbuld have beei repugnant to me and would have 
disturbed my 11>.ecd for inner pea<.e. I already felt better 
as I sat in the train and there was no-one to look at me 
curiously and sympathetically. I travelled day and night 
with,,,., stopping, with a feeling of reall} taking flight 
and breathe,' a sigh of relief when, 011 the second day, I 
caught sight of high mountain peaks through steamed 
windows. I reached the last station as it was growing 
dark. I wr t \\Carily yet happily alon~ dark lanes to the 
fint inn ol a compact little town. Aftt•r a glas~ of deep 
red wine I slept for ten houn, throwing ofl the weariness 
of tr3:vel and also a good deal of the distre&!I of mind with 
which I had come. 
The following morning I tool a seat in the small 
mountain train which travelled through narrow ,•allef$ 
and past white sparkling stream-, toward11 the mountains. 
Ther:f from a small, remote sration. I tra, elled by coach; 
~y mid-day I was in one of the highest villages in the • c3untry. 
I stayed right into the autumn in the onl) small inn of 
.tg 
the quiet little village, at times being the only guest. I 
had had it.in mind to rest here for a short time and then 
travel fu.rlher through Switzerland and see some more of 
foreign parts and the world.•But there was a wind at that 
liei,ht, which blew air across which was so &esh and 
strong, that I felt I never wanted to leave it.' One side-of 
the steep valley was covered almost to the top with fir. 
u;ees, the other slope was sheer rock. I spent my days here, 
by the sun-warmed rocks, or by the side of one of the swift, 
wild stream,, the music of which c.ould be heard during 
the night throughout the whole villagJ. At the beginning, 
I enjoyed the solitude like a cool, healing drink. No one 
bothered about me; no-one -.how~d any curitw;ty or 
sympathy towards me I was alone and f~ee lile a bird 
in the air and I soon forgot my p.1.in and unhealthy 
feelings of envy. At times I regretted bt'ing unable to go 
far into the mountains to sec unknown valleys and pcah 
and to dimb along dangerous pathb. Yet I wao; not 
unhappy. After the events and excitement of the pai,t 
months, the calm.solitude surrounded me like a fortrei,.,, 
I found peace again and learned to acc<•pt my phyo;ical 
defect with resignation, although pcrhap1 not with cheer­
fulness. 
The weeks up there were almo'il the mo,;t beautiful in 
my life. I breathed the pure. clear air, dranL. the icy 
water from the streams and watched the herd,; of goats 
grazing on the steep slope,;, guarded by d.,rk-haircd, 
111using goatherd!t. At times I heard storm.. resound 
through the valley and saw mist1 and <.loud,; at un6sually • close quarters. In the c.lefts of roc.lr..'I• I obsen·ed the small, 
del\cate, briyhtly-covered flowers and the manv wonderful 
mosses, and on clear days I used to like to walk uphill 
!0 
for an hour until I could see the dearly-lined di~tant 
peak.a of high mountains witll, blue silhouettes and white, 
sparkling snow-fields across the other side of l'Jle hill. 
On one part of the footpath where ·a tbin trickle-of 
water from a small spring kept it damp, I found on every 
fine day a stlarm of hundreds of smalJ, blue b11tterfties 
drinking the water. They scarcely moved when I 
approached, and if I disturbed them, they whirled about 
with a fluttering of tiny, silky wings. Since I made the 
discovery, I onl)' went that way on sunny days, and each 
time the dense, blfte swarm was there, and each time it 
was a holiday. 
When I consider it more closely, that period was not 
really as perfectly :rene and sunny and joyous as it 
seems in retrospec.t. There were not only days when it 
rained and even day11 when it snowed and was cold; 
therr ,. , ... e ah,o days when it was stormv and glooll',Y 
wilhm me. I was not used to being alone and after the 
first days of repo11e and delight had passed I again felt 
the pain from which I had run away. auddenh· return 
at times wV I L.e.1dful intemit,·. Man) a cold evening I 
sat in my lmy room with m, travelling mg <Ner my 
knees, wearily and unrestrainedly giving wa,· ,o foolish 
thou~hts. Ever)thing that )0ung blood d.:sired and 
hoped for, partie111 and the gaietv of danciny. the love of 
women and adventure, the triumph of stre•.gth and love, 
lay on the other side of the 'lhore. far removed an<i 
inaccessible to me for ever. E,en that wi"d. defiant period 
of halt-forced gaien, which had endeci in m~ falJ in the 
tvboian, then seemed in m,· mernor· to be beautiful and 
cdtou\"ed in a·paradisiacal wav hl..e? lost land~f pleasyre, 
the ec.ho of which still came aero .. , to me with bacchanal 
!P 
intoxication from the distance. And at times, when 
storms pa;ued over at night, when the contin~l sound 
of the ~Id, down-pouring rain was drowned by the 
strc,ng, plain~ve 'rustling t:irough the storm-swept fir­
. wood, and when a thousand inexplicable sounds of a 
sleepless summer night echoed through the g:rders of the 
~ of the frail house, I la)' dreaming hopelessly and 
restlessly about life and the tumult of love, raging and 
reproaching God. I felt like a miserable poet and 
dreamer, whose most beautiful dream was only a thin, 
coloured .soap-bubble, whilst thousanJs of others in the 
world, happy in their youthful strength, stretched out 
joyous hands for all the prizes of lif ~. . 
Just as I seemed to see all the gloriou:..beauty of the 
mo1:1ntains and everything that my senses enjoyed as 
through a veil and from a great distance, so also did there 
ar·.e between me and the frequent wild outbursts of 
gri11. f, a veil and a slight feeling of strangeness, and soon 
the brightness of the days and the grief of the nights 
were like external voices which I listened to with an 
inviolate heart. · I saw and felt myself like a mass of 
moving douds, like a battlefield full of figllting troops, 
and whether I experienced pleasure and enjoyment, or 
grief and clepression, both moods seemed clearer and 
more comprt hensible to me. They arose from the depths 
ohny soul, a1a,J came to me externally in harmonies and 
series of sounds which I heard as if in my sleep and 
which took posst.'lsion of me against my will. 
It was in the qu1t.t of one evening when I was ret ... rning 
&om the rocky side '>f the valley that I understooa. it all 
clearly for t/}e fint tia 1e, and as I meditated upon ic a.ad 
found myself to be a riddle, it suddenly occurred to me 
51 
what it all signified-that it was the return of those 
strange remote hours which I had experienced with 
some misgiving when I was younger. And with this 
memory, that wonderful clarify returned, the almost glass; 
like brightness and transparency of £ecling41 where cvsry­
thing appealed without a mask, where things -were no 
longer labelled sorrow or happine<1s, hut everything 
signified strength and sound and creative relca"I<". Music 
was arising &om the turmoil, iridescence and conflict of 
my heightened sensibiliti~. 
I now viewed t~e bright day•. the sunhhine and the 
woods, the brown rocks and the di<1tant snow-c.overcd 
mountlins with heigwencd feeling-. of happiness and joy, 
and with a n& conception. During the dark houn I 
felt my sick heart expand and beat more furiously, and 
I no longer made any distinction between plea'lure and 
pair., l.,..1, one was similar to the oth<"r; both hurt and 
ooth were p1u.ious. Whether my inner life went well 
or badly, my di"ICovered strength "ltood peaccfullv outside 
looking on and kn,;-w that light and dark were closely 
relatl"d an,' , hac sorrow and peace were rhythm, part and 
spirit of the same great music. 
I could not write this mmic down: it was !ltill strange 
to me and il'I territon- wa~ unfamiliar. But I could hear 
it. I could feel the world in its perfection within me, and 
I could al<10 retain something of it. a 11mall part and echo 
of it, reduced and translate.cl. I thought about it anfi 
concentrated on it for daH. I found that it could be 
<-xprelcd with two ,riolins and began in complete 
bmC>fiFnce, like a fledgeling tning its wings. to write . . . down my first sonata. 
As I played the first movement on my violin in my 
B 
room one morning, I was fully aware of its weakness, 
incompleteness and faults,• but every bar weat through 
me likr.· a heart-tremor. I did not know whether this 
,music was geod, but I kne\r that it was my own musk, 
born and experienced within me and never heard any­
where e!.se before. 
· Downstairs in the coffee-room, motionless and with 
•hair as white as snow, there sat year in year out, the 
innkeeper's father, ·who was over eighty years' old. He 
never said anything and only looked around him atten­
tively tlirough peaceful-looking eye:. It was a mystery 
as to whether the solemn. silent man possessed more 
than human wisdom and stillness, of spirit, or wht'thcr 
his mental powers had deserted him. I' •went down to 
that old man that morning. my violin under my arm, for 
I had observed that he alwa}'S listened attentively to my 
playing and indeed to all music. As I found him alone, 
I stood before him, tuned my ,·iolin and playro m,· first 
movement to him. The old man directed his peaceful­
looking eyes, the whites of which were yellowish and the 
eyelids red, towards me and listened, and whenevt.-r I 
think of that music, I also sec the old man again and his 
peaceful-l~king eyes watc·hing me. Whm I had finished, 
I nodded to him. He winked knowingl) and i.cemed to 
understand everything. His yellowish eyes returned my 
glmce; then he averted his gaze, lowered hi\ head a little 
and returned to his former motionless state. 
Autumn began early at that height, and a~ I made my 
departure one morning, there was a thick mist wl\1fh fell 
in fine drops as cold rain, but I tcK>k with •l}e the 
sunshine ol the good days and also.as a thankful reme:'m­
brance, courage for my next path in life. 
M 
III 
During my last term at the School of Music. I made the 
acquaintance of the singer Muoth. who had quite a 
creditable rcputaLion in the town. He had finished his 
studies four )Car,; '!go and had immediat~ly obtained a 
position at the Opera House where he was at present sLill 
taking-lesser r,ile.,, and by the side of older weJl-known 
singers was 1'¥>t outitanding. Many people, however, 
considered him to be a future celebrity whose next step 
must lead him to fame. I had seen him on the stage in a 
nnu.i,,:.. of roles and he had nrongl}· impres,;ed me. 
although no• always favtmrably. 
We-became acquainted in the following way. After 
my return to the S<hool of Mmic, I took nty violin 
sonata an1' L\\ ., songs that I bad compo,;cd Lo the teat.her 
who bad showed such kind sympath) towards me. He 
promised to look through the work and give me his 
opinjon about it. It was a long Lime before he did so, 
and meantime I could detect a certain feeling of embar­
ras.'lment on his part whenever 1 met him. Finally, he 
called me aside one day and returned the manuscript ~o 
me. 
"He.Te is your work," he said somewhat uncomfortably. 
"I hoJ-: you have not built too many hopes upon itl 
Tllcre is something in it. without any dou~t, and you 
may yet achieve somctning. To be quite honest. I 
S5 
thought you were already more mature and tranquil, I 
did not re.ally aedit you with such a passionate: nature. 
I expect~ something quieter and more plea,ing, some­
thing more technically conect and whkh could have 
Ueen judged technicc1lly. But your work is not good 
tecHnical,ly so I can say little about that. It is a brave 
auempt, the merit of which l am unable to Judge, but 
a, your tec1cher I cannot p1ai11e it. You hclV<' put both 
less and more in it than I expec.ted and you thus place 
me in an embarrassing position. l am too much of a 
school-master to overlook the sim, of \tyle, and whether 
you will be able to outweigh them l\ith origmalit}, I 
should not like to uy. I will therefore wall until I see 
some more of your work. I wish \ou It ck. You will 
compose agc1in. I know that." 
I then went awc1} and did not know whJ.t to mc1l<' of 
his verdict, which w.u. no re.ll cr1tici1,m. It ~emed to 
me that one should be able to lool at a piece of wod, 
and re immedic1tel} wheth<.T it wc1,; clone a'I a game J.nd 
pauin.e, or whether it .iro,;e from nec<''l&it} c1nd the 
heart. 
I put' the m.1nu,;u1pt a\\a} and det idt.'tl to forget all 
about j,t for the time being and work rec1ll} hard dming 
my last) few months of \tUd)', 
9n.c< day I received an invitation from a fclmil} with 
,1,,.rong mu,;ical interest'§. Thev were f1 iends of my parent, 
and I used to ,i,;it them once or twice cl year It wa'I one 
of the usual evening gathering,; e:t..r<'pl that there were 
one or two well-known people from the Opera '\-lou,;e 
' there whom I knew b) sight. The \mgcr Muoth wa .. 
also there. ,He interested me mo'lt of .ill c1rtd it was the 
first time I had seen him ell 'luc.h clme quarter-. He w,1., 
36 
tall and handsome, a dark, imposing-look man with a 
confident and perhaps al.-eady somewhat pampered 
manner. One could see that women liked him. Apart 
from his manner, he seemctl neither pleased nor prou,d 
and there was something in bis look and counten;mce 
which exp:Cssed much seeking and discontent, When I 
was introduced to him, he acknowledged me with a short 
stiff bow, without saying anything to me. After a while 
he suddenly came up to me and said: "Isn't your name 
Kuhn? Then I ~lrcacly know you a little. Profe-.sor S. 
has shown me yotir work. You must not -hold it against 
him; he was not indiscreet. I came up just as he was 
lookii\g at it, and aa there was a song there, I looked at 
it with his pl!rmission." 
J W,l!> surprised and embarra!>..ed. "Whv are ~-ou telling 
me about it?" I asked. "I believe th<' profesi.or didn't 
li!.t• h .. 
"Does tl1at hurt you? Well, I liked the song very 
much. I could sing it if I had the accompaniment. I 
should lik<' you to let me have i 1." • · 
"You · , eel it? Can it he sung then?" 
"Of course-although it would not be suitable for any 
type of concert. I should like to have it form~· own use 
at lio111e." 
"I will write it out for ~-ou. But why do ~-ou want to 
have it?" 
"Bt."Causc it interest,; me. There is real mu'lic in that 
song. You know it yourself." 
H~looked at me. and his way of looking at people 
macJ& me feel uncomtortablc-. He looked me straight in 
t~e face, studying it with complete calmwess, and his 
eyes were full of curiosity. 
37 
.. You are younger than I thought. You must have 
already suffered a great deal~' 
.. Yes," •f said, .. but I cannot talk about it." 
"You don't 1teed to. I sha'h't ask you any questions." 
lijs look disturbed me. After all, he was quite a well-
known ma&n and I was still a student, so that' although I 
did" not at all like his way of asking questions, I could 
odly defend myself weakly and timidly. He was not 
arrogant but somehow he pierced my sense of misfortune 
and I could onl} put up a slight resistance for there was 
no real opposition on my part. I had' a feeling that he 
was unhappy and that he had an undesired, powerful 
way of seizing on people as if he warted to snatch 'some­
thing from them that would comforl hit'h. His dark, 
searching eyes were as sad as the) were hold and the 
expression on his face made him look. much older than 
he really was! 
Soon afterwards, while his remarl..i. wt•re ,1ill occupying m, tJioughts, I saw him chatting politcl~ and merrily to 
the ho't's daught~r. who was li,tcninK 10 him with delight 
and l~ked at him ai. if he w<·n· a wonderful peri.on. 
I had lived such a loneh life sincc m, auidcnt. that 
I though•t abi,ut this meeting for marn days, and it 
disturbed t me. I was too unsure of my,elf not to stand 
in .f we of i this superior man, and yet too lonel)' and in 
need of someone, not to be flattered by hi11 approach. 
Finau, /, I thought he had forgotten me and his whims 
0/ ,,_ ~t ·evening. Then, to my confusion, he visited me 
a,. L my rooms. 
It was on a December evening and it was alrrady 
dark. The i.nger knocked at the door and came in ls 
if there was nothing remarkable about his visit, and 
58 
without any introduction and superficialities he immedi­
ately entered into conversa'tion with me. I had to let 
him _have the song, and a, he saw my hired •piaD4> in 
the room, he wanted to sing it immediate1.y. I had to sit 
down and 1ccompany him and so I heard my song •ung 
properly for the first time. It was sad and Jboved me 
against my will, for he did not sing it at full singing 
strength but softly, as if to himself. The text, which I 
had read in a magazine the previous year and had copied, 
was as follows: 
When the south wind blows 
The avalanche tun,bles 
\nd Jeath's dirge rumbles. 
Is that God's will? 
Through the lands of men 
I do wander alone, 
Ungreeted and unknown. 
Is that God"s willi' 
Pain is mv lot. 
My heart is like lead. 
I fear that God is dead! 
-Shall I then liver 
From the way he sang it. I could tell that he liked the 
song. 
Wi were silent for a i,hort time; then I asked him if 
he c•uld point out any mistakes and suggest any correc­
tioJ¥. 
Muoth gave me one •1f hi,; keen lf'lOks a!ld shook his 
head. 
39 
.. There is nothing to correct," he said. "I don't know 
whether the ,·omposition if1 good or not. I don't 'under­
stal\d adything about that., There is experience and 
feeling in the" song and because I don't write poetry 
myself, or compose. I am glad when I find. 1omething 
that.seems individual and that I want to sing." 
•:But the text is not mine," I exclaimed. 
"Isn't it? Well, it doc.·11n't mattt.-r; the text is of secon­
dary importan<.e. You must have experien<.ed it, other­
wise you could not have written the qmsic." 
I offered him the copy which I had had rc.•ady for 
some da}S-He took it, rolled it up and pu.,hed i,t into 
hi• coat-pocket. 
"Come and visit me ,omc time.•, it you ~ant," he said 
and gave me his hand. "I !..now vou lead a quiet life. 
I don't want to diuurb it, but now and then one is glad 
to look a good fellow in the face." 
When he had gone, hi., l,u11t word, and his smile 
remained with me. They were in L.l'Cping with thf' <JOng 
he had sung and ~ith ever)thing th.it I L.m.-,\ of the man. 
The longer I pondered upon it, the clearer it bt.-c.ime Lo 
me, and in the end I felt I under .. tood thi11 man. I 
understood why he had c.ome to me, why he lil.ecl my 
song, why he almo.,t pre,;umptiom,h intruded upon me, 
and why he ,;eemcd half-sh), half-bold to me He wa,; 
unhappy, an inward pain gnawed al him, and hi11 lone­
ljness had bcc.omc intolc1able to him. Thi, unhappy man 
had been proud and had tasted 'iolituclc. He co11Id no 
longer endure it; he was searching for people, for a kind 
look and a little under~Landing, and he was read-y 10 
11arrifice hirmelf for them. Thal i., what I thought al the 
time. 
My feelings towards Heinrich Muoth were not clear. 
I sensed his desires and netds, yet I feared he could be 
a cruel, relentless man who might use and then disprd 
me. I was too young and ~y experienct! of people too 
limited, to '1nderstand and accept the fact that he al91ost 
revealed himself naked to people and in doing so, hardly 
seemed to know any shame. Yet I al\O saw that here was 
a sensitive passionate man who was suffering and who 
was alone. Involuntarily, I remembered rumours I had 
heard about Mun~. vague, disjointed students' talk, the 
exact details of whid1 I had forgotten, lnit the echo and 
pattern of whic.h I .hd prC!'<'n·ed in JO} memory. There 
were exciting talt•s wf women and adventure, and with­
out remembcfing one of them, I !lf'Cmed to rec.all some­
thing about bloodshed, and that he wa'I involved in an 
accou11t of a murder or suidde. 
When l had <·om1ucrcd my sh}ness and a.,ked one of 
my colleagues about it, the matter seemed lf'ss serious than 
J had thought. Mooch, it was sairl, had had a love-affair 
with a yop·1g woman of good family, ~nd the latter had, 
in fact, , 1.amitted suicide two }·ears' ago. but no-one 
had ventured to connect the !linger with this affair with 
more than l.antiousl~ made allu!>ions. Evidently, my 
ima~ination, stirred by the meeting with this strange 
and somewhat disturbing person, bad created this atmos­
phere of horror around him. Just the same, he must 
have suffered over that lmc affair. 
I did not have the coura~t· to go and sec him. I could 
not canceal the fact from myself that 1-kinrich Muoth 
was em unhappy and pcrlups desperate person who 
wanted and· needed me, and at times I felP I ought to 
obey the call and that I was contemptible if I did not 
41 
do so. Yet ,I did not go; another feeling preven_ted me. 
I could not give Muoth wh.it he sought from me. I was 
qui\_e different from him and even if in many ways I was 
also isolated a1u!. not fully ~ndentood by other people. 
eveq if I was different &om everyone else an~ separated 
from niosl people by fate and my talents, I did not want 
to. make an issue of it. I had a feeling of avenion and 
repugnance towards Muoth's vehement manner. He was 
a theatrical man and an adventurer, I thought, and he 
was perhapi, destined to live a tragis; and public life. 
On the contrary, I wanted a quiet life: cxdtemcnt and 
audacious talk did not 11Juit me-resignation wa'i my lot. 
That was how I argued with myself t~• set my mind at reit. 
A man had knocled al In) door. I was '-<>rr) for him 
and perhapi I ought to put him before ID)l»Clf, but I 
wanted peace and did not want to let him in. I threw 
myself energetically into my work hut <.ould not rid 
m')self of the tormenting idea that o,omeone stood behind 
me and tugged ~t me. 
As I did not come, Muolh ag.tin tool the initiatite. I 
received a note from him wiiuen in lar~e hold ,hara<.Lers, 
which read: 
Dear Sir. 
I ui,ually celebrate nn birthdav on the 11th 
January with a few frit•nd\. Would ,ou like to 
come along? It woul,1 ghc m pleasure if we 
could hear your sonata on thi,; occa11Jion. What 
do )OU think? Have )OU a colleague with whom . . you c.ould play 1t, or shall I 1end someone tq vou? 
Stefan Kranll would be agr~<·ahle. It would 11lcase 
me v~ry much. 
Hcinri<.h Muoth 
I had not expected that-to play my music, which 
no-one yet knew about, before experts, and to play the 
violin with Kranzl I Ashapied and grateful, I' accq,ted 
the invitation, and onlf two days later l was requested 
by KranzI. to send him the music. After another. two 
days, he invited me to visit him. The well-kndwn violin­
ist was still young. He was very pale and slender and 
looked like a virt uow,. 
As soon as I entered, he said, "So you are Muoth'r 
friend I Well, lc>' u .. start !itraight awa). If we go well 
together, W<' should be all right after plJ.)ing it two or 
three times." • Then he placed ;e'itand before me·. ga,·e me th<' second 
violin part, lharl.ed time and bcgdn with hi!. light sensi­
tive touch, !iO that in compari11on I wa., lp1ite feeble. 
"1':nt so timid)' ! " ht· 11houted a< ro11<, to me without 
stopping, :md ,u· pla}<-d the musu right through. 
"l'hat's all right!" he 11aid. "It\ a pin· ,ou ha,·en't 
a better violin. But never mind .. Xow let 1h pla, the 
Allegro · Ji· 1 le fai,ter so that no-one tale., it fur a funeral 
march. 1'-cadyl" 
I tht'n plmed my mu.,k c1uitc conhdenth with the 
virtuoso, my modest ,iolin !lnunding quile \\di alongside 
his valuable one. l wa'I 'iurprio.l·d to hnd thii, distin­
guishc>d-looking man so natm JI. indeed, almoi-t nai,·e. 
As I began to feel more at home and gathered up cour~~. 
J asked him with some hei.itation what he thought about 
my r.omposition. 
"'6011 will have to a11k i.omeonc eli,,c, m, dear sir. I 
llonh und~stand much about it. It's a little unll'tual. 
but people like that. If Muoth likes it, ~ou can feel 
flattered. He is not ca5\1y pleasc.•d." 
4:\ 
He gave me some advice regarding the playing and 
showed me a few places wh~ alL<'rations were necessary. 
We prantJeci to have anoth~ praL tice the following day, 
and I then departed. 
It, was a comfort to me to find this man ,so natural 
and sincere. If he was one of Muoth's fril·nds, pcrhap1 1 
could also find a place amongst ahem. To be sure, he 
was an accomplished artist and I was a beginner without 
any great prospects. I was sorry that no-one would give 
me an honest opinion of my work, ,The most sev<.Tc 
criticism would have been preferable to 1hese good-
natured remarks whi<.b said nothing. ; 
It was bitterly cold at that time, -ii was difficult to 
keep warm. My companion.. enthusia~1i<.ally1we11t '>kating. 
It was just a year since our outing wi1h Liddy. That 
was not a happy period for me. I looled forward 10 the 
evening at Muoth's, not because I e~pt.-cted too mu,h 
from it, but because I had bad no friends and gaiety 
for so long. During the night before the 11th J.muar}, 
I was awakened by an unu!lual noise and an ahno'it 
amazing feeling of warmth in the air. I rose and werit 
to the window, surprised that it wa'> no longer cold. 
The south wirid had '>Uddenlv come. Damp and wann, 
it ~lew vigorously. High above, the storm swept the 
heavy. masses of cloudi, ac.ross the sky; in the 'itnall gaps 
between the clouds, a few stars, wonderfull) large and 
brilliant, 1,hone through. The roof,; already had hlack 
patches on them, and in the morning. when I wcn~ out, 
all the snow had gone. The ,tree!:"> and pl·ople's •r.t,cs 
see1ned strangely alt<.Tcd, and evt•rywhcrt• there wn l 
breath of pr~mature spring. 
That da) I went about in a slate of feverish excite-
44 
ment, partly on account of the south wind and the 
intoxicating air, partly in &nticipation of the evening. 
I &equently took. out my sqpata, played parts ot it, tkcn 
pushed it away again. Sometimes I found it quite 
beautiful; •t other times it seemed trivial, melandloly 
and vague to me. I could not have endured •this state 
of agitation and anxiety much longer. In the end, I did 
not know whether I wa, looking forward to the forth­
coming evening or not. 
However, it ca141Jc at la.,,. I put on my overcoat, took 
my violin-case with me, and wt.nt to find l\fuoth's house. 
Jt wa, with some difficulty that I found it in the dark. 
It was far out in the, ,uburbs in an unknown and unfre­
<1uentrd roal It wa'I a detached house with a large 
garden, which looked untid} and neglected. :From behind 
tti· L& • <.lll'ICd gclte a largf' dn1t sprang at me. Someonf' 
whi11tled 1t Lack from a window, and growling, it accom­
panied me to the entrance. A little old woman with an 
anxious expre1,sio•1 on her fac<' receit>ed mt' hf're. took 
my coat, nu loo me along cl brightl)-lit pa,,age. 
Kran1l. the ,·iolinist, lived in a ,ery elebrant fashion 
and I had expected Mnoth, who was reputed to be rich, 
to ~ive in a similar lavi11h wa\'. I now .. aw two large, 
1,pacious room 11, far too large for a ha< hclor who was 
little at home. Apart from that, <'\'enthing was very 
simple, or not really simple h~t casual and unarranged. 
Part o( the furniture ~·as old and 'leemed to belong to 
the l\ouse; among,t it were new things, bought indis­
crimitiately and placed about thl' room without any 
farethough~. Only the lighting was splendid. There 
was no gas-instead there were a large num9her of white 
candles in single, auracwvc pewter candlesticks. In the 
45 
main room there was also a kind of chandelier,· a plain 
brass circle containing mahy candles. The chief item 
heae was a very good gr,md ~iano. 
· In the room into which I was led, several men stood 
tallting to each other. I put my ,·iolin-caso down and 
said: .. Good-evening! " Some ot them nodded and then 
turned to ea< h other again. I 11tood there feeling uncom­
fort.ible. Then Kranzl, who w.111 .imong11t 1hem and had 
not 11<.-en me immediately. came across to me, held out 
his hand, introduc.ed me to hi<i, friend--and \.tid: .. Here 
is our new violinist. -Have )OU brought ,our violin 
with you?" Then he <·ailed et< ro11s to the nc"-t :r;oom : 
"Muoth. the )Oung man with the ,,onara is here." 
Heinrid1 Muoth then t..lm<' in, gret.·red nie ,cry warmly 
and took .m<• into the mu\i< ux,rn \\hi< h lookt:d chet'rful 
and ft'\thc. An .1ttr,1<.th t• wom.m in a white drert'I 
handed me .1 gl.tr,o, of o,hcrn ~he w.10, .111 .1<1rc\s from the 
Ro}al Thc.ttre. fo Ill) 11m prio,t•, I ohllt'noo that .apart 
from ht'r, no other collcaguei. of the hoc,t had been 
imited. She was the only I.id, pre11ent. 
A\ I had t•mptied my glao,s ,·er) quid.h, p,1rtly through 
embarr.issment, partl) from an ino,tin< tht· need to get 
warm after the damp, c,eniug wall, -.he poured me out 
anQther and ignon"<l mv prote11111 ... rake it; it won't do 
you any harm. \\'e clo not cat until after the mu-.ic 
Have )OU brought )Our \'iolin with ,ou -and the 
10nata?" 
I made rc\Crvcd replic11 and felt e111b.trr.ts!IC<l .• 1 did 
not know what her relationi.hip iv.to, to Muoth, She 
seemed to be the mistre4is of the hou-.e. She was•veo­
auractive. l subsequently not<'d that my new friend 
only went about with verv b'i'mtiful women. 
46 
Meantime, everyone came into the music-room. Muoth 
put up a music-stand. Eve.yone sat down and soon I 
was playing the music with Kranzl. I played mechani­
cally; it seemed poor to-nfe. Only now and then 'for 
fleeting moments, like flashes of lightning, was I conscy>us 
of the fact iliat I was playing here with KranzL and that 
the evening I had waited for so long with trepidation 
was here, and that a small gathering of experts and 
discerning musicians were sittiug there listening to my 
sonata. Onlv during the Rondo did I become aware that 
Kranzl was pla)itrg magnific.ently, but I ~as still so •hy 
and distracted from the music t:hat I continually thought 
ahou( other things ;ind it sudd<·nly occurred to me that 
I had not e"'n congratulated Muoth on his birthday. 
We finished playing tlw so11ata. The ptctty ladv rose, 
het,1 'lllt her hand to Krau,l and me, and opened the 
door of a a11•allcr room where a tal>h-wa1, 'let for a meal, 
with ,flowers and bottles of 'C\•ine. 
"At last!" cried one of the men, ''.I'm nearly starving.'' 
"You'rt" d 11ocking person," thr lad} rephed. "What 
will th<· '-"mposer think?" 
"Whilh composer? Is he hctc?" 
She pointed me out. '"There he is." 
He looked at me and laughed. "You 11hould ha\'e told 
me that before. Anyway, the musk was very enjoyable. 
But when a man is hungry---" 
We began the meal and as soon as the soup was 
finished and the white wine wa'i poured our, Kranzl 
rose Jnd proposed a toast to th<' host on the occasion of 
his ~irthday. Immediately ilfter the toast, l\luoth rose 
tT» his feet. ""My dear K1anzl. if }OU think I.am going to 
make a speech in reply, you are mistaken. I don't want 
47 
any more speeches, please. But perhaps the o~ly one 
that is necessary, I will takf upon myself. I thank our 
young frjend for his hOnata, which I think iii, splendid. 
Per'haps our (Tiend Kranll •wm some day be glad to 
receive music of his to pla), whic.h he should do, for he 
played lb,! sonata very i.pnp.uhctk.illy. I dtinl a toast 
to the composer and to our good friendship." 
They all clinked glasses, laughed, chaffed me a little, 
and soon the good wine helped to produce an atmo.­
phere of gaiety into which I entered. It wai. a long time 
since~ I had enjo)ed m)i.t•lf and felt ~t ea&e in this way, 
in fact, I had not done i.o for a whole year. No\!, the 
laughter and wine, the clinking of glai.\es, the interlning­
ling of voices and the sight of a ga}', ptetty woman, 
opened up closed doori. of plea•mre to me, and I ea,ily 
entered into the atmosphere of unre,trained merriment, 
of light and livel) convero..uion and i.miling f.tccs. 
Shortly after the meal, ever}one rme and returned to 
the music.-room. where wine and cigarette'§ were handed 
round. A quiet-looking man who had not i.polen mm h 
and who!tl' name I did not know, came up to me and 
said 11ome kind word'§ about the ,onata, which I h.ive 
quite forgotten. Then the ac.tre\S drew me into c.mner­
sation and Muoth sat down hci.ide u,. Wt' dranl anothe-r 
gla5' of wine to our friendi.hip and 11uddenh, hh dark, 
sad eyes sparkled and he said: "I know )OUr story now." 
He turned to the lady. "He broke hii. honeOJ while 
tobogganing, out of love for a prett, ~irl." Th<>n he 
turned to me again. "Thal ii. bt·antiful-to go pead 
over heels down the hill at the moment when love i;I at 
its peak and i& still quite unsullied. It is worth lming a 
healthy leg for that." Laughing, ht' Mnptied his glass 
48 
and again looked gloomy and thoughtful. Then he 
said: "What made you interested in composing?" 
I told him how music had affected me sincf: I was a 
young boy. I told him about the prcviou., i,ummer, a~ut 
my flight into the mountains, about the song and .the 
sonata. 
"I see," he said slowly, "but why does it give you 
pleasure? You can't exprcso; sorrow on paper and be 
finished with it." 
"I don't want to do that,'" J replied. "I don't want to 
thrust aside and ie rid of anvthing but weakne"s and 
constriction. I want to feel that plea.,urc and pain arise 
from -ihe &amc-source, that the,· arc a\pt-cts of the same 
force and pertions • of the i,a1;1c piece of music, each 
beautiful and each e'li,cntial.'" 
"'fan,'" he i,houted ,·chementh·, "you ha,·e a crippled 
leg! Cau rnmic make you forget it:" 
"?l{o, why? In an} <.ai,e, I can never make it better." 
"And doci,n't that makt· }OU de11r.aii:?'" 
"It doc .. n,, ple.1..e me, }OU can be 1oure of that, but I 
hope it \\.11 never bring me to despair." 
"Then }'OU arc lucky, hut I wouhln't e,i.chany.c- a leg 
for that kind of lmk. So that i" how it is with vour 
music! Marian, thi1o is the magi<. of art that we read 
about so ~ouch in hooko.." 
"Don't talk like that!" I cried angrih. • \"ou, }OUrs«:lf, 
don't sing just for ,·our ,alan. but became it is a source 
of pleao;urc and satii,faction to ,ou. \\'h, do ~ou mock 
me ahd yourself? I think it ii, cruel." 
"\Tush I" said Marian, "or he will become angry." 
Muoth looked at me. "I shan't be angr,. He is quite 
right, really. Bur vou can't feel .,o bad about your leg, 
49 
otherwise music-making would not be such a co'°pensa­
tion to yoq. You arc a contented sort of person. Anything 
can happ.cn to you and you nill remain contented-but I 
would never h.a,ve believed ft." 
He sprang angrily to hi• feet. '"And it isn't true. You 
set ~he A,c;i.lanche Song to music; that was no' indkation 
of consolation and satisfac-tion-but of despair. Listen I" 
'suddenly he went to the piano, and it became quieter 
in the room. He began to play, made a mistake, then 
omitted t~ introduc.tion and sang the song. He now 
sang it difterentl) from the wa} he d.ad o,ung it at my 
rooms, and I rould tell that he had sung it often. sinc-c 
then. He now sang it aloud in the deep baritone 'voi<.e 
which I had heard from the stage, :nd thcr4!itrength and 
intense feeling in hi• ·mice made one forget the unrt'lieved 
distress of the song. 
"This man sa)S he wrote that purely for pleasure. He 
doe1n't know an)lhing about de'tpair and is pcrfcctl) 
<.ontented with hi• lot! " he criNl and pointed hi~ hngcr 
at me. There were tears of \hame and anger in my C)ell. 
I saw everything through a mi5it, and in order to end it 
I stood up to go. 
Then I felt •a o,mooth but strong hand prC5ili me hat k 
into the armc-hair and gcnth stroke my hair. There Wl'l'e 
beads of perspirc11ion on my brow; m, eyes were dmcd 
and I held bac.k my tears with difficulty. Looking up, I 
saw Heinrkh Muoth standing in front of me. The others 
did not appear to have observed the whole ~enc c1nd 
my agitation. They were drinking. wine and laug~ing. 
"You are a child," .aid Muoth softly. "When a gian 
writes songs Jike those, he should be beyond that linli 
of thing. But, I am sorry I find a penon whom I like 
50 
and we have hardly been together at all when 1 ~gin 
to pick a quarrel with him.t' 
"Oh, all right," I said pith embarraswncnt, "buJ I 
should like to go home now. The be<,t part of the even­
ing is finis\Jcd.'' 
"Very well, I will not pres11 )OU to stay. The rei.t of 
us will have another drink vet, I think. Would )OU 
mind seeing Marian home? ',he bvei. on the inner side 
of the moat: it i" not ouL of ,our way." 
The prelt\ W(IJll,m looled at him 01rioui.l) for a 
moment. Then 11he turned to me and said. "\\'ill )Ou?" 
I sai~: "WiLh plcd11urc," dnd !lLOO<I up We ouh sdid 
good-bye Lo Muoth I In the anteroom a !lt.n ant helped 
U'> on with olfr co,m; tht•n the httlc old \\orndn clJ>pedred 
sleepilv and took U!I through the gJ.rden to the gate by 
tl·~ la~,,t of ,t lclrgc l,mtern. ·1 he \\ind Wd, 'ltill warm 
and lclTe'l•,i.ag, it drew cllong mJ.'>'SC'> of blJcL doudi, ,md 
11tirrcd the top., of the bare lr<.'t.'> 
I did uot ,cnlllre to offe1 \1Jrtc1n· m, arm, but she 
tool it l' .,.,Led. br<·Jthed m till. rught au ,uth her head 
thrown b.tck and looLed up J.t me l011qmringh and 
trU'ltfulh I 'ltlll '>ecmcd to fed he1 .,oft hclnd on m, 
bah-. ~he WcllLt•d .,Iowh J.11d .,t'cmtd to \\J.nt to lead me. 
"There drc t.db'> mer tht.re, · I 11,.ud, for it was painful 
to mC' th,H ,he '>hould .ulclpt hu ,df to m, l.ime wall and 
it mclde me 11ufft.-r to hcl,c to hmp bt"-,1dc this \\JJ:lll, 
healthv, '>lender 'M>tndn 
"I.et ui. wall J. httlc," 'lht· .,,ml ',he tool.. care to walk 
vc-1yei.lo\\h, J.ml if l held h.ul m, ,,c1,. I .,hould ha,e 
~r.na.n her '>lill clo'lel to mc But I \\,\'§ hlled with 110 
much pain clnd anger that I rdlJ.11l'd ht·r clRll, and when 
11hc looLed at me with '!.,Ul pn,e, 1 ,.ud to her: "It is no 
51 
good like this. Pardon me, I must walk. alone." She 
walked anxiously and sympHhetically by my aide, and I 
on,!y lacked an upright walk. and the consciousness of 
physical strength for me to have been contrary in every• 
thi:ig I said and did. I became quiet and ,reserved. I 
co11:.ld not do otherwise, or I 11hould have had tears in 
mv eyes and longed to feel her hand on my head again. 
I 'would have preferred to escape into the next side­
street. I did not want her to walk 'ilowly, to show con­
sideration towards me aud to pity ni.e. 
"Are you vexed with him?" she said at last. 
"No, it was stupid of me. I hardh· I.now him ,,et." 
"He upsets me when he is like tJ1at. There ~re days 
when I am afraid of him." 
"You, too?" 
"Yes. more than anyone. lie hurts no-one more than 
himself. He hates himself at time,.'" 
"Oh, he puts on a pose.'" 
"What did you say?" sbe said startled. 
"That he is ari actor. What doc., he want to mock 
himself and others for? Wh} doc., ht· ha\·e to dr.1w out 
the experiences and secrets from a friend and ridicule 
them-the miserable wretch I •· 
My previous anger found a way into my !tptteh again. 
I wanted to insult and disparage this man who had hurt 
me and whom I reall)· envit.-d. Al'lo my re.,pec·t for the 
lady had decreased since she defended him and openly 
admitted it to me. Was it not already bad enough that 
she had been the only woman at thi, bachelors' driail·.ing­
party? I was used to little licence iu these things, and .1 
was ashamed to have a )earning for this pretty woman 
just the same. I preferrf'd in my vexation to start a 
51 
quarrel with her rather than (eel her pity any longer. 
If she thought me rude and ,eft me, it would be better 
than her staying and being kJnd to me. 
But she put her hand on my arm. "~tcp," i,he cried 
warmly, so 9that her voice moved me de'ipite myM"ll; 
"don't i.ay any more! What i'i the matter with you? 
Muoth wounded lOU with two or three word., bec.ause 
you were not skilful or c.ouragcom enough to defend 
younrlf, and now th,il )OU h,ne left, )OU attac.k him in 
hateful language il\front of me. I ought to let ,ou walk 
alone!" 
"A., you wi'lh. I onl~ '>c1id whc11 I thought." 
"Don't lie' Ynu a«1=pted hi'> im ttation and lOU plaved 
}OUr mmic t<1 him. You ,c1w hem he liked Jl, how it 
plec1'ied }OU and c.hccrcd ,ou up. And now, be(ause ,ou 
.i.re 'lfli,'\' and can't hl·ar to ht·c1r a \\Ord .i.hout him, ,ou 
1,cg.n to m~111t him You ,houldn't do that, and I will 
put i~ down to the winr ,nu h.n < had " 
It c1ppcared to me th,tt .,}a· ,mldenlJ r~•,th<,ed how things 
wc1c with r .c 111<I th,ll it \\,h 1101 the \\Ille th,tt hadc,c.itcd 
me; i,he (h .. nged her tone c1lthough l did not male the 
i,lightc:.t c1ttcmpt to , mdic ,tic 111\ '>df I \\ .1, ckfcucelc1,.,. 
"You don't lno\l. \tuoth l<"l," ,ht· commucd. "\on 
ha,•e heard him sin~. hc1,cn't \OU? I h.11 h \\hdt he is 
Jilc, fierce and ,iolent, hut mo.,th a~.un..t him1,cl(. He 
11, an cmotinn.1I man; he ha-, gre.1t , igour hut no go~l. 
At even moment he would lile to t.t,te the \\hole world, 
and whatever he ha'I and whc11e,er be doc,, onh c.on.,ti• 
tuteii.m infinite,;im.11 part of it. He cir ink-, and is never 
druP!; he h.u, women .md h, neH'I h,tpp,: he sings • .h magm c.entl} and )Ct doci, not w.mt to b1.. In artist. If 
he m .. e1, amone, he bur~~ him. lie pretends to despise 
53 
all who ¥C contented, but it is really hau~ against 
himself because he does not know contentment. That 
it what.he is like. And he Jtas shown friendship towards 
.you, as much as he is capable of doing." 
J maintained an obstinate silence. 
:•Perhnps you don't need him," she began again, "you 
have other friends. But when we see someone suffer and 
~ being ill-mannered became of his suffering, we ought to 
be indulgent and forgh·e him.·• 
Yes, I thought, one should do, an<J,.graduall) the walk 
in the night cooled me down. and although m~ own 
wound was still open and required to be healed~ 1 was 
induced to thin!.. more .md more aflout what Marian had 
said and about m, ,tupi<l behaviour that \!vening. I felt 
that I wai-a mi11cr.1ble creature who really owed an 
apology. After the effe< L of thc-wine had worn off, I had 
an uncomfortable freling agaimt which I fought. I did 
not i-&)" much morc-to the prett, woman, who now i-eemoo 
agitated and m~>0d~ her\t·lf a11t i-he waU..<"d hc·,idc mt' 
along the dark 11trect11t where, here and tht·r<', the light 
of a lamp wa, ,;uddenlv rcfl('Cted on the d.irk 11urf.ic.e of 
the wet ground. It occurred to me that I had left Ill) 
violin in ~fuoth''i hou..e; in 1he meantime, I wa<, again 
filled with a'itonhhment and al.irm at e\.en thing. The 
evt:ning had turned out to be so different from what I 
had anticipated. Henri<.h Muoth and K.ra111l the ,•iolinin, 
and al!ltO the radiant Marian, who played at being queen. 
had all climbed down from their pedestals. They were 
not godi-or saint'i who dwelt on Ol)mpian heigh1::, but 
mere mortalr,; one wa'i 'imall and droll, anothc• was • oppressed aud U>D(Cited, Muoth was wretched and self-
tormented, the charming woman was pathetic and mi11er-
54 
able as the lady-&iend of a ttulas senr,uali\t who Lnew 
no joy, and y'"t she was gooc) and kind and acquainted 
with suffering. I. my\Clf, fel, changed, wait no longer 1f' 
single person, but a part of dll people, -.ee;ng good ,md 
bad featur~ in .all. I felt I c.ould not Im c.-a prnon h<'W"' 
and hate another pcriton there. I \\ .10, d\h,uucd o( m} ld'-1. 
of undC'r\Landing ,md \dW de.irlv tor the (110,t time in my 
young life that one could not go through hfe dud among!tt 
people so i,imply, hating one pe1.,on .ind loving dnother, 
re'lpttting one person and de'lpi.,ing dnother, but all. 
the .. e emotiom ,H·~e , Im,·h necl up, hdtdh ,;eparable 
dnd at time., hardh J1,ting1mh,1hle I looked dl the 
woma,i wallm~ h\ 'V' .,idc who ''"" now al'lo silenr as 
if <,he too 1eaf1'lt'd thc1t the natur1; of m.1m, thing• wai, 
different hoan what <,he hdd rhought ,,md \dUI 
At la.,t \\C 1c.1ch,·cl her hou<,e 'ihe held out her hand 
to rne, wlmh I g<"ntlv pre., .. ed .md li~..ed. "Sleep well'" 
r,he ~id kindh but without a smile 
I did. too I went homt and to bro: I L.now not how, 
fell a'lleep · m, 1ed1atch .uul ~lept fd1 into the ne~t morn 
ing. Tht. ~ ro\e liL.e the llldll in the Jad.-in-the-box, did 
mv cx.eru,c.,, .111d wa11hed and drc11!Kd m,'IClf It was 
onlv when I .,aw nn coat h.mgiug on the c-hair and 
m,.,r;ed m} v1olin-ca\C, that I thou~ht of the previom 
d,1, Meantime, I h.id slept wc.-11 and felt better I could 
not linl up the thoughb I had had the previous night. 
There onlv remained 'lmc1ll, <,U.inge, m\\,ud e,penenies 
an Dl} memorv, .ind a fcehng of .. urpti.,t th.u I \\a'I 'ltdl 
und1anged and the i,amr d., c,c1 
I 1t1anted to wm L. but 1m , iohn ,, ,l, not there So I 
went out, .it hri,t 1ne..0 1uteh, then wuh d1termination 
in the dirt.'<.tion I h.1d gone ,e~terd.l, and arrhed at 
55 
Muoth's house. Even from the garden-gate I hejtrd him 
singing. The dog sprang• me and was led away with 
.ijfficulty by the old womaq who had quickly come GUI. 
She allowed ,ue to go in. I told her l only wanted to 
';a&ch my violin and did not want to disturfi' the gentle­
man. MJ· violin-c:ai.e was in the anteroom and my violin 
WilS in the case. My music had also Leen put there. 
Muoth must haYe done that; he had thought about me. 
He was singing aloud dose h). I could hear him walking 
quietly up and down as if wearing ,flippers. Al times 
he would strike keys on the piano. His ,oicc sounded 
clear and bright. more powerful than I h,ul ever .heard 
it at the theatre. lie was practiling a rt,lc that was 
unknown to me. He repeated parts of i~ a number of 
times and walked quickly up and down the room. 
I had taken my thing-. and was going to kave. I felt 
quite calm and hardh aff ectcd by the memorv of the 
previous day. But I was curious to 1;ee him and to know 
whether he had. changed. I went nearer, and almost 
involuntaril} I put my hand on the handle, turned it 
and stood in the open doorway. 
Muoth turned round while i.inging. Ht· wa, i11 a shirt, 
in a very long. fine, white 11hirt and look<·d fn· .. h, as if 
he had just had a bath. Too late I took fright that I 
had surprised him like that. However, ht• o,eemed neither 
sul'prised that I had rnme in without knocking nor 
embarrassed because he wai. not dressed. Jui.t a1; if 
everything was pcrfettly normal, he held out bis hand 
and asked: "Have )OU had breaUai.t YN?" Then.. a, I 
said: "Yes," he sat down by the piano. 
"Shall I !Jing my part? Listen to th,· aria I It is a 
mixture! The opt·ra is to he ~ivcn at the Royal Opera 
56 
House with Buttner and Duclli ! But that doesn't 
interest you, or me, really. I-low are you? Have you 
had a good rest? You did1~ t look so well wl}cn yoy. 
left last night. And yo11 were anno~·ed 't'ith me, too. 
Anyway, we,won't start that nonscnrre agaiu now." 
And straight away, without giving me a chan,c to say 
anything, he said: "You know, Krantl i, a nuisance. 
He won't play your sonata." 
"But he playt.-d it yesterday." 
"I mean at a concert. I wanted him to take it on, but 
be won't. It woufc:1 ha\·e been grand if it had been 
included in say, a matinee concert next winter. Kranzl 
isn't a" fool, )OU kn~w, but he is la,~·-He i, alwa)·s 
playing Russii:ft1 musk by 'imky' aml 'ow'ikf. He doc,n't 
like learning anything new." 
"T :lon't think," I began, "that the sonata is suitable 
for a concert and I nc.-vcr had that in mind. It is ,till 
not f\awless technically." 
"That's nonsense! You and your t~hnil"alit.ies! \\'c 
arc not SC"1 •K •-teachcri. and without douht \\ orse thing-. 
will be pl .. Jed, e\cn by Kran.d. But I J..nnw different!~·. 
You must give mc-the song and writc-i.nmc more soon I 
I am leaving here in the ~pring. I ha,c handed in my 
resignation aud am going on a long holida,. during 
which I want to gi,·c one or rwo concerts, bm with 
something new, not Sdmbc-rt, \\'olf and Lowe and the 
others that we hear e,·cry evening. I want at least one 
or two new and unknown picct·s of mmic, -.ul·h as the 
Anl.w1chc Song. What do you think:-" 
The prospect of my song, being sung in puhlk by 
l\.f uoth was like a gatcwr.y to the future thro,.gh the bars 
of whkh I could set• splendid ,·ii.1.1s. For that \'cry reason ... :, ' 
I wanted to be cautious and neither abuse Muotb'1 
kindness ~or bind myself ,-o him too much. it seemed 
-to me 1hat he wanted to ,draw me to him forcibly, to 
dazzle me aqd in some way overpower me. Therefore 
'-,,hardly committed myself . 
. "I will see,'" I said. "You arc ,cry kind to me, I 
~ali,ie that, but I cannot promise am thing. I am at 
the end of my 11tudics and mn,t now think about good 
testimonials. Whether I sh.i.11 ever mal..e ID) way as a 
composer is uncertain. Meantime, 1. am a violinist and 
must try to obtain a po11ition MlOn.'' 
"Oh, yes, you can do all that. But )OU may tb,ink of 
another song like tbat one, which, 1ou can lf't me have. 
Will you?" 
"Yes, of course, although I don't know why you take 
11uch an interest in me.'" 
"Arc vou afrJ.id of me? I simph· lil..e ,our music. I 
should like to sing some more of )Our 'iOnlrJ and look 
forward to doing so. It i,; pure <'goi'lm." 
"All right, but whv did ,ou IJ.ll.. to me as )OU did 
yestercla) ?" 
"Oh, you are still offended I What did I reall} sa,? . 
I no longer remember. Amwa,, I didn't iniend to treat 
you roughl), a\ I i,eem to have done. But ,ou can defend 
y6urself! One tall..s, and e,ery per..on i, .1, he is and 
ai, he must be, and people have to a«ept each other.'' 
"That's what I think, but you do ju'llt the oppo,;ite. 
You provoke me and do not accept what I 11ay. Yon 
draw out of me things that I don',t want to thinka"tbout 
m)i,elf J.nd that are m) affair, and throw them ba•l.. in 
my face lik.t a reproach. You even mocl.. me about my 
stiff leg." 
Heinrich Muoth said slowly: "Well, well, people are 
different. One man is wild if you tell him the truth, 
and another can't bear it if >"f,u say nothing. You were 
annoyed because I didn'~ tr:at you with false ;espect 
and I was avnoyed because you were on the defensive;, 
and tried to delude me with fine phrases about t4e solace 
of art." 
"I meant what I said, only I am not uo,ed to talking 
about these things. And I won't talk about the other 
matter either. How things seen, to me, whether I am o;ad 
or in despair and h8w my leg came to be irtjurt-d, I want 
to keep to myself, and I don't want to let anyone drag 
them oftt of me and mc><.k me about them." 
He stood uia 
"1 haven't anything on yet. I'll go and get dreued. 
You'rr a good fellow. I'm not, I know. \Ve won't talk 
:i.boul lt 110 auuch again. Jlao;n"t it occurred to ~ou that I 
like }?U? Just wait a little. Sit down by the piano until 
I'm dressed. IJo you sing?-- No?-- Well, I'll only 
be a few 1v:.11,tes:· · · 
He 1001 .eturned dre'i'lled from the adjoinin!{ room. 
"We'll go into town now and have a meal," he said 
lightly. He did not a.,J.. whether it •mited me. He said: 
·•we•n go," and we \\ent. For however much his manner 
annoyed me, it imprc .. ~d me: h,. was the 'ilronger char­
acter of the two. At the -.ame time, he displa~·ed a 
whimsical, childlike dispoo;ition in hi, comersation alid 
behaviour which was of ten charming and which quite 
won rue o,·er. 
Frqpi that time I saw Muoth often. He frequently 
se~t me tickets for the op--ra. 'l<lmetimes im·it~ me down 
to play the violin, and i( I did not like eventhing about 
59 
him, there were little things he did not like about me. 
A friendship was eistablishfd between us, at that time my 
,_poly ooe, and I almost bey,an to fear the time when he 
would no looger be there.• He had in fact handed in his 
,esignation and could not be pre11ised to st."lY, despite a 
nu111ber,of request11 and induet:J:llents. At times he hinted 
t4at there might be a part for him at a large theatre in 
the autumn, hut it wa .. not )et arr.angcd. In the mean­
time spring arrived. 
One da) I went to Muoth's hou.,e for the la,t gentle­
men's gathering. \\'e drank to our nh.t meeting ,md the 
future, and thi11 time theie wa,; no wom,m pre .. cnt. Muoth 
accompanied us to the garden-gate, earh in the rriorning. 
He waved u,; farewell and I<'turned sh:,•<'ring in the 
morning mi11t to hi., alre,uh half-emptied room.,, a,rom­
panied by the leaping ,md b,u ling do~ It S<'emed to 
me that a section of m, life .u1tl experience had now 
ended. I felt I .Loew Muoth \\ell enough to be sure that 
he would 1100n forget u-, all, and onh now did I 'lt'e 
dearly and unmi11take.1hh ho~ mulh I had lil,•d this 
moody, imperious man. 
The time for ID} dcp.irture had al!IO arrhro. J madt' 
m} Ian ,i11it., to pi.ire., .incl to p<·ople whom I would 
remember lindh. I alo,o \\ent on« mm<· up to the hil{h 
road and looked down .it the ,lope, \\hich I would not 
indeed forget. 
I set off home to an unknown and ,1pp,nt·111h ,minter­
esting future. I had no 'lituation nJ<I I rnuld not gh·e 
independent c.onc.ertis. At homt· tht•re onh dWaitfP me, 
to mv d1,mal, -,ome studento, \\ho \\antcd "iolin l~..oni.. 
To be sure.~ Ill} p.1relll'!t c1l~o a\\,lit<·d me .ind they were 
rich enough to <,ee th.it I did not \\ ,mt for am thinK, 
60 
also tactful and kind enough not to press me and a-.J.. 
what w,H to be<.ome of me But right from the beginning 
I k.ncw that I i,hould not he Ihle to endure it he1e lontt .. 
There is not much for 111e fo say about tqe ten months 
that I spent at home. During rhh time I gave lesson-. tJ;a,, 
three stude~t'i, and de'ipitc. everHhing wa\ n!)t reall) 
unhappy. People lived here al,;o· things hdppened here 
also every day, but I onh had" feeling of poliLe indifler­
enc.e row,1rd1i C\Cr) thmg On rhc other hand, I secretlv 
apenenc.ed strang<', entunc.ing hours wnh music, when 
my whole way ot h~ seemed 101 p1d dud remote, .md only 
a hunger for 10u,;1c. rem,uned, which often tormented 
me un'bearabh durmg th«· \ 1ohn le1i\OU'i and certainly 
mdde me a lwd tcac'1t.r But ,1fterward1,, when I had 
fulfilled m, obhgc1uom or hdd c\cldcd m, le'i'ions w1th 
cunning and eMU-.C'i. I relapo;ed mto a v.onderful dream­
like-11tdtc Ill v.hich I hmlt bold o,ound <.-d1bct,, erected 
m,1gnihcent <d'>tlcs m th<. dlr, r.w,c.d .ircheo, Cd'itms; long 
\hctdo~s, dnd created mu.,H .al p.atterm, "~ light ,md 
delicate a'> o, '>-hubhll.'i 
\\ihilst ~<.nt about m .i ,;tatt of 'itupefaction and 
ab\01ption \\lmh drme .1v.a\ m, p1c,1ou<i companions 
.ind ~orried m\ p.irents, the dammed up ,;prmg \\ithin 
me buro,t forth even mote forc1bh c1nd p1ofu!ll"h than it 
h.id done the pre\ 1ou, , ear m th, mount am,; ·1 he f1 mts 
of 'SCCminqh lo<it , <"Jro, durm~ v. h1ch I had v. orl..ed and 
drc.imcd, \uddcnh r1penc·d c111d ft"II .,ofth c1nd genth, 
one ,tftt•r the othet Tht', ,Hre 'i\\t'l't .md fr.1~rc1nt, the, 
i,urrounded me. m .ilmoi,t o,e1v.hclmmg abundance, and • I p1<.~ul them up v.uh he1,1t.it.on and m111trmt It began 
v.,1h ,l \ong, then follc\\cd .i , 10hn f.int-1,\ta, then a 
i,trmg quartet, c1nd when after a fev. momho; I had 
tu 
composed some more songs and several symphonic themes. 
I felt that. it was all only the beginning and an attcmpL 
..Znward~y. I had visions et a great symphony; in my 
wildest mom~nts I even thotight of an opera. Meanwhile, -"°m time to time I wrote polite letters to COl)ductors and 
th«:_atres, ,enclosed copies of testimonials from my teachers 
and humbly asked to be remembered for the next 
~cancy for a violinist. Then came short, polite replies 
which began: "Dear Sir";-sometimcs there were no 
replies, and there was no promise of an appointment. 
Then for a day or two I felt insignif,cant and retreat<.-d 
into myself, gave con!ICientious lt'5SOns and wrote further 
polite letters. When I was alone, I again immeliiately 
felt that my ht"ad was still full of n\usic tl11\l 1 wantt>d to 
write down. Hardly had I begun again when the letters, 
theatres, orchc,tra'I, comlucton and "Dear Sir," fadl-d 
away from my thoughts and I found lll)"1»clf fully occupied 
and contented. 
But these arc memories that one cannot properly 
describe, like most recollection... What a p<"r1«>n really 
is and CXpt"rience'I, how he dc,clop• and mature~, grows 
feeble and dieo,, is reallv all indc..c rib.tble. The li,·es of 
ordinary working people are boring, hut tht" activities 
and destinies of idlero, arc intt"re'lting. llowt>ver rich 
th.tt period remains in m~ mcmon, I cannot \ay anything 
about it, for I remained apart from or<linan· ,ocial life. 
Only once, for moment~. did 1 again coml' < loser to a 
person whom I will not forget. He wa, a teacher callt"d 
Lobe. 
One day, late in the autumn, I went for a wat~. A 
modest viii~ suburb had arisen on the south side of the 
town. No rich people dwelt in the small, inexpcmive 
61 
houses with their neat gardens, but respectable middle­
clasa families and people who lived on small incomes. 
A clever young master-buildfr had erected a mvnber ~ · 
attractive houses here which I was intqested to see. 
It was a ~arm afternoon. Here and there, !lUts bar! 
fallen belately from the trees; the small new hvuses and 
gardens were clearly outlined in the sunshine. They 
were of a simple de11ign that appealed to m<'. I looked 
at them with the superficial inrcrc-1t rhat }'oung people 
have for these thin15, when thoughts of h~u!IC, home and 
family, rest-days and holidays arc 'lilill remote. The 
peaceful streets with their gardens made a very pleasing 
impression on me. I strolled along 'lilowl~. and as I was 
walking, I happened To read the name of the <x·cupier of 
the house on a small bright bra,.s-plate on the garden­
gar«· 
·•·he nc1m,. "Konrad Lohe" was on the .,mall brass 
plate, and a, I read it, the name seemed familar to me.· 
I stood still and reftected. Then I i:emembered thc1t that 
was the r ,rru of one of the teachers at the Grammar 
School. 1-.,r a few moments, the past rose before me, con­
fronted 1m· with surprise, and :a ma~ of faces, Leathers 
and friends, memorie~ ol nkkname~ ,md storie'li danced 
before me in fteeting wnes. As I ~tood there looking at 
the brass-plate, a man ro\C from behind a nearln < urrant­
bush where he had been bt>nding down while 'M.orki~g. 
H<" tame forward and looked at me. 
"Did you want me?"' Ill' c1sked, and it wa11 Lohe, the 
tea< ~-r whom we used to ,·all Lohengrin 
"f"ior really,"' I said c1nd 1aised m~ hat. "I did not 
kTaow that )OU lh·ed h ... rc. I u,;ed to bl vne of ,·our 
scholars." 
He looked at me more keenly, observed my stick, 
reflected a moment and then pronounced my name. I le 
had not remembered ftly ~ ace, but my atift leg, for he 
naturally knew about my accident. Tben he asked me 
to come in. 
His shirt-sleeves were rolled up and he was wearing a 
gr&!en gardening apron. He did not seem to have grown 
older and looked wonderfully well. We walked through 
the small, neat garden, then he led me to an open 
veranda, where we sat down. 
"Well, I would never ha,e recognised )OU," he said 
candidly. "( hope your memory o( me has been a kind 
one ... 
"'Not entire!), .. 1 .,aid lJughing: 11\,oU ,,nee puni<1hcd 
me for something I did not do and det lc1red my protes­
tations of innocence to bt• lieh. It wa-. in 1he fourth c.la-.,." 
He looked up with a 1rouhled expr<''>'>ion on his face. 
"You muht not hold it again'>! me. I Jill V<"ry sorry. 
With all the good intention., in th<' world, it rontinually 
happens wirh teac hen that something goe,; wrong and 
an act of inju.,tke i., rnmmittecl. I know of wor&e ca'iC'>. 
That is one of the rea..on., wh, I l<'ft." 
"Oh, aren't ,ou '>till teaching?" 
"Not for a long time now. I b(."f .unc ill. and when I 
recovered, ml view., had lh,mged "° much that I resignro. 
I tried to be a good tcadu.•r, hut I wa<1n't one; ,ou have 
to be born to it. ~o I gave it up and since 1hen I have 
felt better ... 
I could <1ee that I l'nquired further, but he wJ.r11ed to 
hear my story, wlii< h wa,; soon 1ofd. He wa, noi_ alto­
gether ple~"'-d that I had becom<" a mll'li< ian. On t'lic 
other hand, he &bowed uncommon -.ympathy, whic.h did 
fj4 
not make me feel too sensitive, in regard lo my ill-luck. 
He discreetly tried to discover how I had succeeded in 
finding consolation, and was .ot t.itisfied with m1 half­
evasive answers. With mysterious gesticulations, he inti­
mated hesi~ingly and yet unreservedly, with much 
halting circumlocution Lhat he knew of a so\ace, of 
complete wisdom which was there for every earnest 
seeker. 
"J know," I said, ")oU mean the Biblt"." 
l\,Jr. Lobe smiled mystcriou-1) The Bible is good; it 
is the way to knowlfdge, hut it is not knowledge itself." 
"Well, when• is knowle<lge itself?" 
"You will find ii easily if you wi!ih to. I will give you 
something to rAld that gives the principles of it. Have 
you heard of the sLudy of Karma?"' 
"Karma? No, what is it?" 
• Hhl will find out. Just wait a minute!" He went 
away and ~as absent for a short time while I sat there 
surprised, not knowing what to <'xpect, and looked down 
the garden wl>t"re diminutive fruit-tt'ees' stood in faultless 
rows. Af ·· a short time, Lobe returned. He looked at 
me with a h<"am on his face and handed me a small book, 
whid1 bore in th<" middlr of a m),;terious symbolic pat­
tern. the title of .. Thl•mophi(ill CateC'hism for B«-ginners." 
"rake Lhat with you!•· he said. "You ma}· keep it and 
if you want to study further, I can l,·11<1 you some more 
books. This one is only an introduc·tion. I owe every­
thing to these teachings. I ha,e become well in body and 
soul thfough them ancl hope 1he~ will do the same for 
you." 
f took the small book and put it in my pocket. The 
man accompanied me through the g:\rden down to the 
C 
road, took friendly leave of me and asked me to come 
again soon. I looked at his fat.e, which was good and 
happy, and it seemed to nl,e that there could be no harm 
. in trying th~ path to such happiness. So I went home wilh 
the little book in my pocket, curious about,the first steps 
along t!iis path to bliss. 
·vet I only embarked upon it after a few days. On my 
teturn home, the call of music was again powerful. I 
threw myself into it and lived in a world of music. I 
wrote and played until the storm within me was apain 
silenced and I could return c.almly to t"verv-day life. 
Then I immediately felt the need to study the new 
teachings and sat with the little book in front of me 
which I thought I could soon absorb. 
But I did not find it so easy. The little book became 
massh·e in my hand'i and finally seemed unfathomable. 
It began with an interesting introduction cm the many 
paths to wisdom to which cver}OllC had accc'i"Jt, and the 
theosophical brotherhood which stood independently 
for knowledge and inner perfection, in which e\'t'ry faith 
was respected and e\'CJ'}' path to tht• light was welcom<". 
Then followed a cosmology which I did not undrruand, 
a division of the world into different "plan<...,", and 
history into remarkable ages unknown to me, in which 
the lost countl'} of Atlanti, was. also induded. I left this 
for a time and turned to the other chapters where the 
doctrine of reincarnation was prc11cntcc:I, which I under­
stood better. Yet it was not quite dear to me whether it 
was all mythology and poetic fal?lei., or whether .it was 
to be taken literally. It seemed to me to be the latter, 
which I could not accept. Then came the teachings 
about Karma. It appeared to me to he a religious 
66 
interpretation of the law of causality, which was not 
unattractive to me. And so on. I soon realised that 
these teachings could only "e of solace and value to . r • those who could accep~ them literally, ~nd smcerely 
believe thC!Ji to be true. If, as they were to me, partly 
beautiful literature, partly intricate symbols, an, attempt 
at a mythological explanation of the world, one could be 
instructed by them and hold them in esteem, but one 
could not learn how Lo live and gain strength from them. 
One could perhaps be a worthy and religious theosophist, • • but the final solace only beckoned to those who accepted 
simple beliefs without Loo much questioning. In the 
meantime, it was not for me. 
All the sanw, I welh to see the teacher several more 
times. Twelve years' ago we ha<l plagued each other with 
Greek, and now, in quite a different way, equally unsuc­
c.'-,sht1 •y, he tried to be my teacher and guide. We did 
not beco111c: close friends, but I lik\!d going to see him, 
and 'for a time he was the onl} p<'fSOn with_ whom I 
discuss<'d important ao;pccts of 111, Ufc-. I did indeed 
realise t' •• all thi'i talk was of no value and at its best 
only led to clever phr.tses. Yet I found him soothing 
and worthy of reverence, this devout man who had 
coolly renounced dmnh and knowledge and who in the 
latter half of his life experienced the peace and glory of 
religion through naive beliet in remarkable, subtly 
reasoned teachings. 
Despite all endeavours on my part, this path has 
alway1 been closed to me. Yet I have a great leaning, 
\\hiclJ is not reciprocc1ted, towards religious people who 
a~ fortified and gain pea,·e through one faith.or another. 
IV 
:Ouring the short period of my visits to the pious theoso 
phist and fruit-grower, I on<' day received a smdll t he,1m·, 
the reason for which was a nnstery to me. It had b(•en 
• C sent to me by a well-1..nown north-German t·ont"l'I t .u;ent 
with whom, howevt'r, I had never had am· dealings. On 
making enquiries, I received the reply that this amount 
had been forwarded to me by order 06 Mr. Heinrich 
Muoth. He had sung a song composed b\" me at ,ix 
concerts, and this sum represented 1m fee. 
I then wrote to J\.fuoth, thanked him and asked for 
news. Abo,e all, I wanted to J..now how 1m 11ong bad 
been received at the concerts. I had heard about Muoth's 
recitals and had seen notices about them once or twice 
in the newspapers. Of cour11e, I dill not· cxpt-ct to Sl't 
anything about my 110ng. I wrote to him about my 
activities and work in minute detail, a11 11olitary people· 
often do, and also endosed one of m, new song!I. Then 
I waited for an answer. As I had 11till rcct>ivcd none after 
four weeks, I forgot all about th<' whole matter again. 
Almost every day, I still wrote mmk, whkh haunted 
me like in a dream. During the intenals. however, I felt 
limp and discontented. I ver) .much di11likcd ,S{iving 
lessons and felt I could not endure it much l~ngl.-r. 
I therefQTe felt that a curse wa11 lifted from me whcn 
I finally received a letter from Muoth. He wrote: 
68 
Dear Mr. Kuhn, 
I am no letter-writer. I did not answer your 
letter as I did not reatly know what to s,y. But 
now I can put forward concrete proposals. I am 
now clngagecl at the Opera House here in R. and 
I should be pleased if )OU could also come here. 
You rnuld, in the fir\t plac<', obtain a position 
here a<i a set.ond violiniist. The c.ouduc tor is an 
inteJligcnt, frank man, even though &omcwhat 
abrupt. Yo .. would probably also soon have an 
opportunity to play &ome of )Our music.. We have 
good chamber tonccrt& here. I also have some­
thing to tell y~u about your songs; one thing is 
that thAc is a publi!th<'r whr wants to have them. 
But writing i'I such a bore. It would be better if 
vou c.amc. Come quickly and wire me about the 
po.,ition. 
Ycmrc,, 
Muoth. 
I ~a, r',u ,uddenh dr.1gged .twa, from m) unprofi­
table an•. ,1ermit'i, exi'lteuc.<' I wa'I again drawn into the 
stream of life. had hopes and < areis, &orrows and joys. 
Tllt're wa'i nothing to lc-ep me. and my parents were 
glacl to sec me take m,· first ddmite step in my career 
in life. I sent a wire without dda,, and three da~·s later 
I was already in R. with Muoth. 
l had ohtain<'d auommodation in a hotel. l.went'to 
visit Muoth but did uot find him in. Then he came to 
my hetd and unexpectedly stood before me. He held 
oit Hs hand, asked me no qut'!ttions. did not tell me 
anything and did not s'iare my excitement ill the sligh­
test. He was used to Jetting him'IClf be drawn along by 
6g 
events, only experiencing and taking the presen~ moment 
seriously.· He hardly gave me time to change my clothe ■ 
and thin took me to see dossier, the conductor. 
"This is Mr. Kuhn," he said. 
Rossler nodded. "How do you do! What t'an I do for 
you?" 
· "He is the violinist," cried Muolh. 
The conductor looked at me with 11urpri~. turned to 
the singer again and said rndel}: "\'ou didn't tell me 
that the gentleman wa'i lame. I mt~'t h,n·t-people with 
straight limbs." 
The blood rose lo mv face but Muolh remain~ t'alm. 
He just laughed. "Do ,ou wa111 tiim 10 d.mc e, Ros'ilcr? 
I thought he was to pla, the ,·iolin. If h~ can't do that, 
we must send him away again. But le-t us hear him first." 
"Very well. gentlemen. --Mr. Kuhn. t'ome and sec 
me tomorrow monting about nine o'c lcx l., here in my 
rooms. Are )OU anno,cd al what I ,airl about the foot? 
Well, Muoth viould have told me about it. .\n}way, 
we shall 'iCe. Till tomonow ! " 
As we went awav, I reproad1ed Muoth about it. He 
shrugged his shoulders and 'iaid that if he had mentioned 
my infirmity at the beginning, it would ha,e beeri 
<lifficult to obtain the conductor·i, rnns<'nt. Now I was 
here and if Roii,Ier found me reasonahlv o,atisfactory, I 
would soon get to know the better ,ide of hi'i nature. 
"But how could }OU recommend mc in anv c-a'ie?" 
I asked. "You don't even know i( I am any good. 
"That's your aff'air. I thought •)OU would be a1r! right 
-and you will be, too. You're such an unass~ming 
fellow that if someone didn't give you a puiih at times, 
you would never get an} wber~. That was a pu'ih-now 
70 
you go ahead! You need not be afraid. Your prede.:es­
aor wasn't much good." 
We spent the evening in hidrooms. Here agaiq,he had 
rented some rooms in a remote district whne there was 
a large gar4en and it was quiet. His powerful dog 
sprang forward to greet him. We had h:trdly ,at down 
and warmed ouneh·<'ll when the b<'IJ was rung and a tall, 
very beautiful woman came in and kept us company. 
It was the same atmosphere as previousJy, and his lady­
fri~nd was again a i[>lendid, queenly person. He seemed 
to take the lovely woman very muc.h for granted and I 
looked at this latest lady-love with sympathy, and with 
the embarrassinent that I alwayo; felt in the presence of 
attractive wo1ften. It wa&, indeed, not without envy. 
for with my lame Jeg I wais unloved and without hope of 
low. 
As in thr pa11t, we enjo}ed omwht·\ and drank a great 
deal, at Muoth's. He dominatc·d uo; with his exueme, 
but inwardly half-enfor«:d Aaicty, which nevertheless 
charmed 11. He &aDA for m enchantin~h- and also sang 
one of n,, songs. The tlm·«; of m bc.-came very friendly; 
a feeling of warmth spread amongst m and drew us 
d<>M!. We were natural with each other and remained 
close as Jong as the warmth in us endured. The tall 
lady, who was called Lottie. W.t'l> friendlv towards me in 
a gentle way. It wa!t not the first time that a beautiful 
and affectionate woman had treated me in thi• sympa­
thetic and e"lttrcmel}· confiding wa,. It hurt me this time 
too, llut 1 now r«ogniscd this recurrent form of 
~a, iour and did not take u too much to he.irt. Some-
• times I ha,·c even know1. l\omen who haH o;h&wn special 
friendship towards me. T~c} all regarded me as incapable 
71 
of jealou~ as of love. That was where the 1,mde1ired 
sympathy appec1.red and they confided in me in a halC­
maternat wa}, 
Unfortunateh, I still had no c~pericnre of 11urh affain 
and could not lool on the happme,11 of Jove at dose 
qua1 ten,, without thmlinl( .ibout nn..elf • httlc.-and 
fieeling that I should .t.l'IO h.t.ve liL.l'd to indulge in 'IOIDe­
thing ,inul,11 It ,poilt ID) plc.-,mne to 'lome extent, but 
on the "'hole it "'.i., .i. plt•.i,.int C\<nmst m the comp.1ny 
of th111 lmeh, L.md lc1.d, .ind the c1.br.i1pt. \tgorou11 nun 
who hkt'd me and tooL. .m mtcrc,t m me ,md u·t tould 
not i,ho~ ha., afferuon in ,lll) ,hffut.nt "·" d1c1.n he dad 
ll.llh women. n,uneh m a lorct.f11l and rnocxh f.i,h1on 
,\11 \\C dmLed gl.,.,.,c.., fut tht. 1,1'1 Ullll hefo1c lt'.t\mg. 
he nodded to me c1.nd ,.11d "I re,tlh ought to drml to 
our good fr1cnd11hip, ,houldtt't I· I ,hould <ertamly 
hle to do "° Hut ne, er mmd 11 will he ,tll ru~ht Just 
the ,.i.mc At onl' ttmt., \\ hcne, er I met .m, one.-I hlc-d, 
I .tl\\ .1,., c1.ddr6b11ul htm 1mme,h.1tt•h m .m mtun.ue 
f.i11h1011, but It hn I a good thm~. le.N of ,tll .1111ong\l 
c.olle.1gt1c·, I qu.urellul \\llh them 111 JU..t rht .,,mtt " 
This time I clad not hd\C th<" h11tc.-1 'l\\<.t l plu,ure of 
ha, ing to .1ccompc1.n, m, f11t.ml\ IJ.ch loH home C,he 
r~aimd thtrt. ,md 11 \\,t., btttu -.o I IH 1ournc}, the 
\i'IJt to Liu. <.onduc.101 the .,u,pt'n'lt ,thoul the followmg 
mornmg and the rl'n<.wed .io,.,,x 1.1uon \Uth Muoth h,ul 
all done•me good Onh no\\ dad I r.t•t ho\\ fm~ollen, 1ll 
at ease ,md remote from peoplt I hc1.d hccomc durmg 
mv long, loneh ,ec11 of w,utmg: J11<l \\Ith .i. "Jal'IC of 
enJoymeut .1nd health, \uo,peno,e, I \\J.'I .1gc1.m ,deK ,tpd 
active ,,m1dng,,t people, ag.1111 h< longmg to the.-world 
The next mornml( I reporte.,I to Rcml<.r m ~ood tune 
7• 
I found him in his dressing-gown and with his hair 
uncombed, but he made me welcome, and in a friendlier 
fashion than the previous da~. he invited me to /!lay the 
violin, placed hand-written music before me and sat 
down by die piano. I played as well as I could, but 
reading the badly-written music gave me some trouble. 
When we had finished, he silently placed another sheet 
before me to play without auy accompanu11ent, and 
then a third sheet. 
:'That's all righi."' he said. "You will l_iave to become 
more used to reading the musir; it is not always printed. 
Co111e to the theatre tonight. I will make room for you; 
then you can play }~Ur part with the others, who have 
meantime fill@c.l •he gap when• nu..cssary. It will go a 
little hard at the hcgi1111i11g. Study the mur.ic well in 
ac" ,.•,re. Then· is 110 rchcanal toda~. I will give you 
a note; talt ,. it to the theatre at cle, en o"clock and fetch 
the 111usic." 
I was not quite c~rtaiu of mv posjtion, but realised 
that this m11, did not like quei,tions, .1.nd I went away. 
At the tuc:atre no-one wanted to know an,·thing about 
the mu11ic or to lii.tt•n to me. I was unused to the machin­
ery there and was discouccrted. I ,;em a 11pl'Cial messenger 
to Muoth. He came and immediately everything went 
smoothly. In the evening I pl.t~ec.l for the first time at 
rhe theatre and was dosely obsencd h} the conductor. 
The following day I ohtained the appointment. 
So strange is the human being thar in the midsr of 
my n•w life and fulfilled wi!.hes, I was sometimes aware 
o~ a ·light. fleeting, subconsdous desire for solitude, for 
even boring and empty c.lavs. It then seen1e~to me that 
the time I bad suent at home and the dreary unc,·cntful 
73 
life &om which I was so glad to escape, was spmething 
desirable. In particular, I though with real longing 
about tlJe weeks I had sped.t in the mountains two yean' 
·ago. I felt r.hat I was not destined for well-being and 
happiness, but for weakness and oppressido, and that 
without these shadows and saaifices, the creative spring 
within me was more feeble and turbid. At first there 
really was no question of quiet hours and creative work, 
and although I was living a full life, I continually 
thought I heard the dammed-up ,Jipring within me 
whisper softly and complainingly. 
I enjoyed pla}ing the violin in the ord1C1,tra. I .poured 
over full scores a gr<'at deal and jch m, way longingly 
in this field. Slowl}, I learned wh.at I hid onl} known 
theoretic;ally and remotely. n,unel} to undcr,tand the 
nature, colour and significance of ,ingle ill',trumcnts 
from the bottom upwards. At the.· s.une time, 1 studied 
ballet mu,;ic and looked forw,lfd with greater ec1rnestne-,s 
to the time when I c.onld , enturc to "rite :m opera 
myself. 
My close relation,;hip with l\luoth, who held one of 
the best J>O!iition,; at the Opera Home, facilitated my. 
progress and wa,; ven u15cful to me. 1 Wd'I ver} SOITh 
h9wever, that I did not mal..c am do'5c friends among 
my own colleague'§ in the orc.hc,;tra, whit h I would have 
liked. Only a first violinist, a Styrian called Teiser, took 
an interRSt in me and became nn friend. He wa, ten 
years older than I, an honest, 111traightforward man with 
a gentle, refined face that easil}' t"eddeued. He 1tras an 
extraordinarily mmpctcnt musician, and had a particu­
larly keen And '§cnsitive car. He wa'I one of tho,;e people 
who find 11atitifaction in their art without wanting to 
74 
play any outstanding part. He was no virtuoso and had 
never composed anything. He was content to play the 
violin and obtained his greatt.fst pleasure from a f orough 
knowledge of technique. He knew every overture in 
detail, and lnew as well as any conductor where delicacy 
and brilliant playing were nt.-cessary and where the inclu­
sion of an instrume11t prrxluced a beautiful and original 
dkct. This made him radiant and he enjoyed himself 
more than anyone el&e in the whole theatre. He could 
p'-1y nearly all th~im,1rument1, M> that I could ask him 
questions and learn from him daily. 
For many month& we di',(, uo;,;ed nothing but technique, 
but I liked him and ~e i.aw that I wao; anxious to learn. 
An unspoke1.-unde1<,tandi11g aroo,c between m that did 
not fall far short of friendi.hip. Then I finalh told him 
a~, .•. , mv violin ,;onata and ao;ked him to pla~ it with 
me some ,: nc. He kindly a,._rr<·ed and came tom, rooms 
at the appointed time. In order ro plea<,c him, I obtained• 
i.ome wine from hio, nati\e town. \\'c drank a gla,;s of 
the:-winr tl :n I put up the mu.,ic aud w<· began. He 
read the. music ver~ Wf'll, but 'iuddenl~ he .,topped and 
lowered his bow. 
"I i,ay, Kuhn," he <,aid, "this re:-alh· i':i loveh· music. 
I don't want to pla, it amhow. I want to take it home 
and practii.e it fir.,t. Ma, I?" 
"Yes,'' I <1aid. aud when he came again, we played ihe 
sonata through twice. When we h.t.d finished, he slapped 
me on the shoulder and tried: "You modest creature! 
You ~etencl to be i.m h an innocent and i.t·creth ,ou do 
thir,1:,s likc this! I won't say much-I am not a professor, 
b~t it is beautiful!" 
That was the first limp that wmeone in whom I really 
75 
had confidence had praised my work. I showed him all 
my wor~. including the songs which were just being 
publishc;d and which were lfoon to appear. But I did not 
· dare tell him.that I was so bold as to think o( composing 
an opera. 
·During those good days 1 was shod..ed by a small 
inddent that I can never forget. At Muoth's, where I 
was a frequent visitor, I had not seen the pretty woman 
called Lottie for some time, but I did not think much 
about it because I did not want to '1e<,·ome involved jn 
any of his love-affair,;. I preferred uot to know about 
them. I therefore did not inquire abour her. Besides, 
he never talked to me ahout the~ thinh.,,.· 
One afternoon I sat in 111} mom stml~ihg ., ,con·. 8} 
the window, my blac-k cat la~ i.leeping in the ,1111,;hine. 
The whole house wa,; <1nic•t. l"IH'n I heard ,omc•om· 
enter by the front door who wai. stopped and questioned 
by the landlady, left her, then < amc and L.n<>< L.t•d at 111)" 
door. I went t<> open it and a tall, elcg.uu womJ.n with 
a veil over her fJ.u· came in :md do,ed the door behind 
her. She toot.. a few Mt'p'i into the room. breatlwd deeph· 
and then took off her wil. ll w.1,; Lollit•. She.· looked 
excited and ·1 immcdiateh gueo;,t•d win· i.hc had come. 
AJ,. my request ,;he sat down. She had takc-n m,· hand 
but hacl not ,et i.aid amthing. Slit• ,ccmed more.• at ea,;e 
when she oh,c.·n·t•d 111) cmbarras,;mcnt, a,; if i.he fcar<.'<I 
I might bave sent her awav imnw<liatch·. 
"Is it about Hcinri< h Muoth ?" I a,;kc•d at la,t. 
She nodded. "Did ,ou know aflvthing?" 
"No. I don't know am thing. It i, only what I though\f" 
Sh~ look&l me in the fau· like a ,ic k per!IOn look,; at a 
doct<'l", wu silent and slowly too,j(. ofl her gloves. Smldcnh·, 
76 
she stood up, placed both hands on my shoulders and 
ga1.ed at me with her big eyes. 
"What shall I do? He is never at home, Jie never 
writes to me, he never 6pens my letters I I '1ave not been 
able to spelk to him for three weeks. I went there yester­
day. I know he was in but he did not open the door. 
Not once did he whistle to his dog which had tom my 
dress. He doesn't want to know me any more." 
"Have you had a quarrel with him?" I asked, so that 
I .should not rem~ n silent. 
She laughed. "Quarrel? Oh, we have had enough 
c1uarrcls righl from the beginning! I wa'i used to that. 
No, he ha11 even bee~ politt· 10 me lately, whkh I imme­
diately misu\sted. On 011<' occasion he wa'in't there 
when he asked me lo come: another time he said he was 
, .,u, .. g to st·e me and did not turn up. Fi nail~-. he began 
to addres., me fonnally. I would ha,·e preferred him to. 
beat me again." 
I was sunmed "Rt·at you!" 
She 1 .1~11ed again. "Didn't ,ou know. Oh, he has 
often beaten me. bm not for a long time now. He has 
lit·comc polite; h<' addresses me formally and doe, not 
W;Jnt to know nu· any mmc. I cxpt.-ct he has someone 
else. That is wh}· I ha,·t' come her<'. Tdl me, please! 
Has he another woman? You know, )OU must know!·· 
Before I rnuld prc\'cnl it, 'iht" took hold of both-my 
hands. I wai. a,tounded at "hat -,he had tohl me, but 
because l did not wii.h to di'I< m,., it and desired to end 
the .:enc, I was almost glad that !>he did not give me a 
<Jta1.cc to speak, for l would not h.t\"e known what to say. 
Alternately hopdul and 1101Towful, !>he \\'1s contented 
that I should listen to 11/r. She ask.t>d me questions. told ... II 
me things and burst into fits of weeping. All the time 
I looked at her pretty, tearful face and could think of 
nothing rise except, "He has beaten ber I" I seemed to 
iee his clenched hand, and I shuddc.-red at the thought 
of him, and of her, too. After being· beaten, korned and 
repulsed, 1he seemed to have no other thought and wish 
bbt to return to him and the same humilic1tions. 
At last the ftoud i.uhsided. Lottie began to speak more 
slowly. She seemed embarrassed and coni.dou,; of the 
situation, became silent, and at the i;,"'mc time released 
my hands. 
"There is no-one else," I said gentl}, "at least 11ot as 
far a,; I am aw.ire." 
She looked at me gratefull). 
"But I can't help you," I continued. "I never tall.. to 
him about such things." 
• \Ve were both silent a while. I , ould not help but think 
of Mc1rian, of prcttl' Mc1ri.m an<l th.tt e"ening when we 
had walked arm-in-clJ"m the i.ame night thl' .. outh \\ind 
had come. and how she h.id \0 lmc1l1) defended bf'r lover. 
Had he beaten her c1l.,o? And did .,ill' '>till punue him? 
"\\Thy did you come to me?" I a\l..ed 
"I don't know. I had to do ..omething. Do ,ou know 
if .he still think,; about me? \'ou are a good man. You 
will help me, won't wu? You could c10,l.. him i.ome time, 
speak about me ... " 
"No, I •an't do that. If he !ltill lO\eo, )OU, he will come 
to )OU himi.elf. If not, then . . . " 
"Then what?" 
"Then let him go. He i., not \\orthy that ,ou shuul,t 
humble youhelf '.IO much." 
Th-reupon she smiled. 
"'Oh, what do you know about love! •· 
She was right, I thought, but it hurt me just the same. 
If love did not come Lo me, if I stood outside, how could 
I be taken into anyone's C'onfidence and he of help? I 
felt sorry ftfr this woman but I despised her even more. 
If that was love, with auclty here and humiliation there, 
then it was better to live without love. 
"I don't want to argue, ' I ,;aid <0olly. I don't under-
stand this kind of love." 
_Lottie fastened on ha veil again. 
"Very well, I'm •going." 
Then I felt sorry for her clgain, but I did not want this 
ridiculous scene to be rcp(·.1tcd &o I did not <,ay anything. 
She walked ttJwards the door and I opened it for her. 
I accompanied her pa'>t the inquisitive landlady to the 
sr:-:, · then I bowed and .,he went awa} without sa1ing 
anything 11•orc anJ without looking at me. 
I .looked after her -..1dly and could not tid myself of' 
the memory of her for a long time. -Was I really quite 
different ro • .1 all these other people, from Marian, Lottie 
and Muoth? Was tint really 10\e? I !'law all these 
passionate people reel about and drift haph,uardl~ a,; if 
dri,ven by a storm, the man filled with desire toda\, 
satiated on the morrow, loving hercely and di!ICarding 
brutally, sure of no affection and happy in no love~ 
then there were the women who were drawn to him, 
suffering insults and beatings, finally rejected. and yet 
still clinging to him, degraded by jealousy and despised 
love,.but still .,remaining faithful. That day, for the 
fll'st time for a very long time, I wept. I shed im·olun­
tlry tears of vexation about these peoplot about my 
&iend Muoth, and life and love, and also secret tears 
79 
about myself who lived amongst everything • as if on 
another Star, who did not understand life, who longed 
for love and yet was afraid of it. 
I did 1',ot go to see Heinrich any more for a long time. 
At that time he was enjoying triumphs a, a singer of 
Wagner opt"ra and WJS beginning to be r'lfJrdc.-d as a 
celebrity." At the same time. I also had a mod<Tate 
amount of publidty . .M} song'I had bel"n published and 
well rt.'<.ei\·ed and two piecei, of my chamber-music had 
been performc.·d. It was still jm,t ll little encouragi,ng 
recognition amongM friend'!; th<' critic.s ,till said little 
or were for the moist p.n t indulgent tow:mli. a1e :t'I a 
beginner. 
I spent a great deal of tinu· wi1i1 reist'f, the violinii,t. 
He liked me, prahcd m,· work, and took friendly pleasure 
in it. He propheo,ied great thinR'I for me and was alwav'i 
read\· to pla) nm .. il with ml". Jmt thl' ,amc I felt th,tt 
something was l.u king. I was drawn to ~1uoth, althou~h 
Ii.till a\'oidcd him. I did not hear any more from Lottit·. 
\\'hy then wa'I I not content:' I rl"proachl"d m\i.df for 
nut being satisfied \\hh the l·ompan) of Tcii,cr, who wa'i 
so good and loval. But I found !lnmething lacking in 
him, too. lie wai. too happ}, too< hccrful, too tontentt'<I; 
4c seemed to have no depth. He did not 'lpeak wl'II of 
Muoth. Sometimci. when !\fuoth ,:m~ at the th<•atrc, he 
looked at me and whisprred: .. I k ha, ruinc.'<I it ag-Jin ! 
That Jll<Ul is quite spoilt. He doe:\n't sing Mo,arr and he 
knows why." I had to agree with him and vet I did !to 
unwillingly. I wai, drawn to l\fu(')tb, but did not Likt• to 
defend him. Muoth had something that Tciser dia not 
have or uR.:leri.tand and which bound me to him. •1is 
nature was ,ontinually de111irinf, longing and insatiable. 
So 
These same qualities drove me to study and work, to 
people who seemed to slip away from me, just as they 
goaded and tormented Muoth in other ways. I would 
always write music. I 'knew that. But J also~anted to 
create so~thing out of happim·ss and abundance and 
uninterrupted joy, in,tead of continual longing and a 
sense of Jack. Oh, why wa,; I nor happy with what I 
had-my music? And why was Muoth not happy with 
what he po.,scsscd -his tremendous vitality and his 
11iomcn? 
Teiser wa'I luc·ky; he wa-1 not tormented by any desires 
for the unattainahle. He deri\'ed a k<.-en, unfailing 
plcai.ure from his arr He did nor ai.k for more rhan it 
gave him, al'td ouu,i~lt• his art he war, e\'en more easy to 
satisfv; ht• ouly needt•d a few friendly pe()plc, an occa,;ion­
•• 1 !-"lMI ~la,, of wine. and on frl'c da~s an exn1rsion inro 
the COlll'Lf}", for he liked walkin~ and open-air life-. If 
then· wa,; anything in the teaching!i of the theosophi,ts, 
then thii. man wa!i almmt pl-rfrct·: lri,; dispo,;ition was so 
kind :-.I ue harhourcd so littlt' pa11s1on and discontent. 
\'et, even if I perhap'> deceived 111~,df. I did not wish to 
be like him. I did not want to he likt· am·onP else. I 
~anted to remain in my own ,;kin. although it was often 
so constrktivc. I hegan to fed power within me as m)' 
work grew and I also began to fed proud. I had to find 
a brid~c· to reach people, I must learn how to li\'e.with 
them without alwa,·11 ft-c·ling at a dii.adumar.r, If there 
was no othl'r way, pcrh,tp, m, mui.ic would create a 
bri,&gc-. If pl·oplc did not like m<'. the, would ha,·e tu 
likt: my music 
I could not rid Dl\''iCJf of Mll'h foolish thoughts and 
vet I was rt.·adv to devote and sacrifice myself to someone 
81 
who wanted me, to someone who really undentood me. 
Was not music the seaet law of the world? Did not 
the earth and stan move in a harmonious circle? And 
ihould I flave to remain alone and not find people whose 
natures harmonised well with my own? 
A year had gone by since I had been in this town. 
Apart from Muoth, Teisler and our conductor, Rossler, 
I had very few acquaintan<.es at the beginning: latterly, 
however, I moved about in a larger circle, which did not 
particularly please or displease 1ne. Sin;c the pcrformanc;e 
of my chamber-musk, I had become" .1.cqnainted with 
musicians in the town outside the theatre and now 
enjoyed a growing reput.1tion in a i;mall cirde. I notiC<.-d 
that people knew and ob'ICn·ed m•e. Of all fam<', the 
sweetest is that which is not yet for any great succeH, 
which cannot cause <'11\"\ and which doe,; not io,olatl' you. 
You go about with the feeling that )OU!., arc notic.ed, 
flamed and praised; you nu.-et peopl<' who welcome you 
with a smile, and acquaintanles who give ,ou a fri<"nc.lly 
nod. Younger people greet }OU with re\pet·t, and }"OU 
secretly feel that the be,t is still to wmc, a,; all young 
people do, until they see that the bei.t already lies behind 
them. My pl~a,;urc wa,; i.poilt chiefh· by th<' feeling that 
th~e was alwa}S some s~mpath~ behind this rt.'<·ognition. 
Quite often I even felt that people were so kind and 
friendly toward,; me because I was a poor fellow and a 
cripple )Vhpm they wanted to con'IOle. 
After a concert at which a violin duet of mine had 
been played, I made the acquaintante of a rich mert.bant 
called Imthor, who wa'i reputed to be a lover of m~sic 
and a patro~ of }Oung talent. He was a rather small~ 
quiet man with greying hair in whom one could detect 
81 
neither his ric.hes nor his love of art. But from what he 
said to me, I could see that he understood a great deal 
about music; he did not give extravagant praise, but 
quiet comaetent judgement, which was wo1th ~ore. He 
told me whit I had already known for a long time from 
other sources, namely, that many mu'.iical eveningi. were 
h~ld at his house, and new a-; wdl as c las.'.iical music was 
performed. He invited me to <ome down, and before 
parting said: "We.have your songoi at home and we like 
them. My9'laught~'I' will ali.o be glad if .you will come." 
Even before I thought of visiting him, I received a 
written invitation from him. Mr. Imthor a'.ikc.-d permission 
for my Trio in E Hal major to he performed at hi'i house. 
A violinist arftl a cenT,t. compt'tcnt amatcuri., were a,•ail­
able, and the first violin part would he kept for me if I 
••• .. ••t"I tn play it. I knew tha1 lmthor alw.1~11 paid a \Cry 
good fee to profei.sional muo;ician-. who pla,ed at his 
hodse. I would not wio;h to accc·pt thi,; .md )Cl did nor 
know how to take tht> im·itation. Finalh-, l accepted it. 
The l\, '>ther mu,idans c.ame to ,ee me, rcc.eived their 
parts and we had a number of rehc.•.1rsal,. In the mean­
time. I called round to o;cc lmthor, hut found no one at 
home. Then the appointed e,t>nin~ arri,·ed. 
lmthor wa'i a widower lie li\ed in .111 old, stately, 
middlc-dai.s home, one of the tcw ,till !lurrmmded bv its 
old garden which had remained intact in the midst of 
the growing town. I ~aw little of 1he g.ml'll when I 
arrived in the evening, onh .i ,hort drhc with tall plane­
tr«!e in the lamp-light one could ,ee the light marL.-. on 
~•ei• trunks. In hetwec.·n them were two old statues 
which had bccom<' darl..t•m·d with age. Bdlind the tall 
lrt'es, the old, hroad. !ow home.· ,tood unassumingh. 
83 
From the . front-door, along the passages, stairs_, and in 
all the r~ms we passed through, the walls were closely 
covered with old pictures of family groups, f:ided land­
scapes, o'Ri-fa!hioned scenes and animals. 1 arrived at 
the same time as other guests. We were rd:-eived by a 
boµse-kceper and taken inside. 
There were not very many guests, but they seemed to 
fi.h the smallish rooms until the doors of the music-room 
were opened. This was a large room and everything here 
looked new, the grand-pi.mo, the im,;ic-caltinc:ts, tJ1e 
lamps and the chairs; only the pkturcs on the wall._ 
were old here, too. 
The Olher two musirian'I were a!re:idy therr. Wr put 
up the music-stands,-tooked into thl' lightiftg, and bt.-gan 
to tune up. Then a door was opened from the far end 
of the room, and J I.uh in a liJ!.hl dn·s'I < ame acros11 the 
half-illumined room. The other two gentl<'men greeted 
"her respectfulh·. She wa11 Imthor's dauJ1,hter. She looked 
at me questioningly, then bl"fon· we were introduced, she 
held out her hand to me and ._aid: "I know Y°'!I alrea<h. 
You are Mr. Kuhn, aren't you? You are ,·erv welcome." 
The pretty girl had made an impre'lsion on me a, soon 
as she had come in. Now her voice M>mukd M> bright 
and kind that 1 prc\secl the outstretched hand w.mnh 
ana looked with pleasure at the: girl who had gn·rtecl 
me in such a charming, fri,·ncllv mamwr. 
''I'm lq>king forward to the Trio," i,he 11aid \miling . 
.. I am, too," I said, not knowing what I wa'I sa\ing. 
I looked at her again and \he nodded. Then she nw>vN.I 
away, went out of the room and my eyes followed •he'° 
She soon retA1rned on her father's arm, and behind them 
came the gue!its. We three musirians were in our places 
84 
ready to begin. Everyone sat down. A nuniber of 
aC'quaintance& nodded to me, the h<Ht '>hook hands with 
me, and ~en evenone had \eltled down, the electric 
lights we '>Witched off, and only the la~ candle\ 
remained t light our mu'>ic. 
I had almo'>l forgotten about m\ mu,;ic.. I looked for 
Miss Gertrude al the back of the room. \he '>ell leaning 
agaimt a book-c.ao,c• in the dim light. Her dark brown 
hair looked almoo,t black. I could not sre her e~ e\. Then 
I ..i,oftly beclt time, nmldoo, and wt. c.ommenc.ed the 
And,mte ~ith .t b~o,1d o,\\cep of the how 
Now that I WJ.'I pluin~. I kit happ, J11<I ,ll pec1.ce. I 
swayed genth 10 the rlnthm c1.nd felt completeh ,lt ea~ 
with the mu!i,, \\lucl1 c1.ll <,et"mcd quite nc\\ to ntt: cl'I if 
it hc1d just been comp<>'>cd '.\h thought, about the mu.,ic 
an•' Gertrude lmthor flmn·d toµ,ethe1 < lc-c1.rh without a 
bH•Jl. I •ln•w mv bo\\ c1.nd ~,l\l' di1e(liom with m, 
gl.1pce. The mu,i, puxeeded 'lllloothh and ,1t·J11ih: rt 
c .irried me with it ,11011~ .1 ~oldt•n path 10 Geru udr. 
whom I •<'11ld no lomt< t ,,·c .md no" 110 loni;er «-,en 
dt·,ired .u sec· I dt.·dic.c1.tcd nn mu,ic .md m, life's hrc-ath, 
nn thought, J.nd m, hcJ.1 t hl her, '"' dll t:J.rh mornin~ 
wanderer .,urrendc1., him,clf to the hluc ,l, c1nd rhc 
bright dew on the ml•,ulmn, imolun1.111h .md \\ithout 
,.urihcing him11elf. SimultJ11<•ou, \\ilh 1hi, fceli11~ of 
wdl-bcin~ J.nd the inue.1,in~ ,uhm1,· of '>Ollllll. I \\.l'I 
OH'I\\hclmcd In ,m a,toni,hin~ kt:lin~ nf h.ipL>mC!i'li. for 
I .,ud,knh lnew \\ h,11 Im,. w.i.,. It ".1, not .1 ne" ft't·lin~. 
but r# da11hl,1tion .uul t<mhrmation of old ,u,pidon,, .i 
1'._t"ll ... n lo ,l 11,lll\C Ulllllll\. 
The flr-.t 1110,cmcnt w,h hni.,hcd: thctt· ''il!t ju..t a kw 
monwn1,' pc1.u,e 
Then there were the slightly discordant squnda oC 
insttuments being tuned up. Beyond intent and approving 
faces, I saw the dark head for a moment, the l'ICll-shaped 
forehead , .. nd. the hrm, red lips. Then I ta9.>e<1 lightly 
on my stand and we c.ommenced the 11CC011d movement, 
which spoke for it1elf. The pl.iyrn warmed up, the 
iqcreasing )C.tming in the meloch &welled into a 
c.rcscendo; it took. 1c..tlr\& upward flight\ and then faded 
away with sad longing. 'I he c.cllo tool. up tht• melody 
clearly and enthmia1tital1), de,elop~d it -.uongh aad 
insistenth, and introdmcd it ,ofth into the n<'w lower 
key, whete it faded .tW.l\ dc,p.,iringh on h.tl(angry 
sounding ha,, note... 
This second 111o~ement "•" Ill\ umf<-.,.,ion~.m ,ulmi1,ion 
of ffl) longing and I.1tl. of m, he.art\ dt·,iic. l"he third 
movement \\.ts intended to rcp1e-,cnt ,.1tiir,t.u tion .tnd 
fulfilment. But that cu·ning I L.new th.u II WJ'> not 
correct, and I pla,ed it \\ith imhflerence .,, ,omething 
that wa-. finiir,hed with. I-or I thought I no\\ I.new 
e,c.atth how the fulfilmc:nt ir,hould hJH' ,ou11dcd, how the 
radiance and pc.ice ,hould haH' emerged through the 
raging ,;tonn of 1mmd. H'\l'.tling the light from behind 
the bean clood-. \II thi-, \\d'I not includ,·d in Ill) third 
movement; it w.i, onh gentle relief from gt owing di,;­
sonance ancl .in attempt to re~h C .ind ,trengthen the 
main theme a little. 1 here wa., no harmom or r.adianc.e 
in it suc.f\ a1 wao, now revealed and expcrien<cd within 
me, and I war, ,urprised that no-one seemed to notice it. 
My Trio wa1 fmi-.hed. I bowed to-the other two pt,,er1 
,md put mv violin away. The li~hr-. were -.witched on 
again and t~ l{ucr,t,; st.trtecl to stir. M.tn, of them <c1m: 
up to me 1\-ith the mual polite rem.irk!t, prai,;e and 
86 
aitidllDI to demonstrate that they were expert judges. 
No-one mentioned the chie( fault in the work. . 
The gt.pta spread out into different rooms. Tea, 
cakes and "ine were 'lCrved, and the men tm•ed. One 
hour passed and then another. At last, what I hardl)· 
dared to hope for any longer took place. Gertrude stood 
before me and held out her hand. 
"Did )'OU like it? I a11ked. 
"Yes, it wa'i beautiful." she said. But I \aW that 'ihe 
nwant more than tJiat, llO I said: "\ ou mean the 'iCcond 
movement. The la.,t one• i'I not good." 
She looked al me again c u1iomh, with the .,agadn of 
a mature woman and ,;aid: "You I.now it ,·our,;elf. The 
first movcmeftt is good mu-.ic; thl' 'lt·,ond movemt·nt i~ 
greatly develop<.-d and demand'i too much from the third. 
P;,.. oulJ also !,Cl! while you were plaving when ,our 
heart w.:1., in it and wht>n it was 001." 
11 pleased me to hc,tr that her Jm·cl)·. bright e~es hacl' 
obi,ervt'd me without m~ J..nowini:;- ir. I already thought 
on thar 111 t c,·cning o( our mcctiug how glorious it 
would uc to spend one's whole life regarded by those 
beautiful, candid e~cs, and how it would tht'n be impos­
si~le ever to thinl or do ill. And from that l'\ening I 
knew that m) dt'sirc for unity and sweet hannony could 
be sati.,ficd, and that tht're w.l~ !,Ollleont> on ecll'th whose 
glance and voi< c made an instant re11ponse to e,·ery t!trob 
of my pulse and C\'en breath in m, bod,. 
She alM> felt an immccliatc 'IHnpathC'lic response 
tow¥ds me and right from the beginning she was able 
\p bi frank ancl natural '1th me, without fear of mis­
understanding or a brt:.a.ch of confidence. She4rnmediately 
made friendl!i with me with the speed and ease that is 
87 
only possible with people who are young and almost 
unspoilt. Up till that time I had occasionally been 
attracted to girls, but always-and particular~ since my 
·accident..J1with a ~h~. wistful and unsure fec_:\ing. Now, 
inste-t1d of being just attracted, I was really in love, and 
it -seemed that a thin, grc} vc:il had faUen from my eyes 
and that the world la,· before me in its original dhine 
light as it does to childrc..n, and as it appears to u" in 
our dreams of Parc1dh,e. 
At that time, Gt.'l"trude was hardl\ more that twc·my 
vears' old, as ~lcnd(•r .1.nd health, a-. ,t -.uon~ ,t:rng trc·e. 
She had pao,secl untouched through the· mu,11 turbulenc c 
of adolescenn·. following the clict,,tc·, of ht"r own noble 
nature like ..1 clcarl} 1ku·lopi11~ mdcKh. l'·klt h.1pJl\ to 
know .i pt·r,on lil..c• h<.·t in thi, imperkc t world and I 
could not think of tr}ing to, ,tptmc· ht·1 .md 1..t·t·p lll-r for 
_myself. I wa .. gl.ul to be pc·rmitrt·d to ,h.ue her h,,ppy 
}Outh a little and to !..now ri~ht from the· he~inning that 
I would be indud(•d ;uuong.,t hc·r do..c fr il'nd,. 
During the night aftc·r that um,i, ,tl <.'\cuing. I did not 
fall asleep for a long time. I wa, not tormented In am· 
fever or feeling of rc,tlci,<,ne.,.., hut I I.I\ .1w.1J..c· ,tnd c1.ic.l • 
not wish to ~lt'ep beuu,c I knew th.1t m, i.pliug-timc 
h<\d arrived and that 3:ft<"r long, wi,tfnl, futile w,mderings 
and wintrv sca~om, nl\ hcJrt wa, now ,It re,;t. M, room 
was failed with the pale glimmc·r of night. I wuld ,;c•c 
-all the g"al" of lif ~ and art lying heforc me lilc wind-
1wcpt peak\. J wa<t awc1re of what I had so often lrn.t, 
the harmom· and inward rhvthm df mv lift• tr,1< etl ,• ight 
back to the lcgcmlan ,c.ar, of mv d1ildh<K><I. And "·hep 
I wanted ,,~xpre.,-, thi~ du·,1mlile he.1.ut} and i.ublimi1, 
of feeling briefly and call it tn, ,t name, then I had to 
88 
give the name of Gc.-rtrude. That is how I fell asleep 
wben it was already approaching morning, and the next 
day l awa\enec.J refrc,;hed after a long, deep sleep. 
I then ryectcd on my recent £celing'I ol d,-,pair and 
also pridt.", and I realised what had been Ja/king. Today 
nothing tormented me or annop·d me. I again heanJ 
the divine mu,;ic and had Ill} }Ollthful dream of the 
harmony of the sphere'!. I again waU,t:d ,md thought and 
breathed to an inward melod}; life again had meaning 
and I looked forward to a heuer fu1111c. ="o-nnt> noticed 
• • llw ,hang<· m rm·; there w.1, no nn<· < lo~: enough. Onlv 
Teii,er, with hi'I lhildlik<- '>impli<il\. ga,e me a fricndh­
tap on tht> iihouldcr durin~ n·he,lT'>al .ll the theatre and 
said: "You ~ltpr wdl l.t'>t ni~ht, didn't }Ou:-" I rhou~ht 
of wmething to plca!,C him and during the next intcnal 
I .,,;,i: "Tci11cr. where au· ,ou ~oin~ to thi., 'iiununer?"' 
'1 hcreupc11 he laugllt'cl ha .. hfulh ancl flmhed a, red ,l'I an 
ensaged girl who i, ,l,l..<·d ,llmnt her w<·dding da}, anlf 
he said: "Dear me, th,11\ a Inn~ W,l\ otl H'I. hut look, I 
have tl• t, ·ket, ,tlrea<h. · II<· tool thl·m out of hi'I 
waistco,at pod.et. "Thi., time I ,t.irt from l\odemee: then 
the Rhim· ,alle,. 1-'ilNt·ntum. Lichtemtein. Chur, Albula, 
t•ppcr F.ngadinc, !\lalaja. Bt·r~ell :md Lale Come>. I 
don't know ,lhout thl' n·turn journc, H•t." 
He:-picked up hi, , iolin ag.1in and looked at me:-with 
pride and d<'light ,hini11g 0111 of hi., hlm·-gre, chil~like 
eye,;, whid1 'il"Cmed lll'H'r to h:n l' ,t·t·n .m, of th~ filth and 
sorrow in the \\orld. I felt ,l 'l'll'>l' ol lin..hip with him 
and .r.ht• W,I\ ht• lo,,J..,•d fon,.ud to hi, long W,llkiug 
1»>litl:l\, to freedom :m,l un·frec unit, \\ ith ,un. air and 
t•arth. In the iiamc ""' I felt rl'lll'Wt'd pk"6ure at the 
thought of all th" path,; in m, lifl· "hkh la, before me 
R9 
as if illumined by a briJliant new sun, and .which I 
thought I· could travel along steadily with bright eyes 
and a pure heart. 
Now, 1'..hen I look back, it all seems very {emote, but 
I am still conscious of some of the former light, even if 
it is not so dazzling. Even now, as in the past, it is a 
cemfort to me in times of depression, and disperses the 
dust from my soul when I pronounn:· the name of 
Gertrude and think of how she came up to me in the 
music-room of her father's house. as lic~htly as a bird and 
as naturally as to a friend. 
I now visited Muoth again, whom I had avoided as 
-much as possible since Louie's p~inful confc11sion. He 
had noticed it and was, I knew. too proud' and also too 
indifferent to do anything about it, i.o we had not he-en 
alone together for monthi.. Now that I had r<'ne\\t-d 
faith in life and was full of good intentions, it seemed 
very important to me to approach rn, ueglec1ed frit•nd 
again. A new M>ng that I had composed gue me an 
excu'\C for doing so. I decided to dedkate it to him. 
It was similar to tht" Avalanche Song. whi(h he liked, 
and the words were a" follows: 
The hour was late, I bl,·w out nl\ candlt·: 
B} the open window I t,,rrt."f'ted the ni~ht. 
It embraced me gently, call<'d me brotht•r 
Aqd promi'ICd me friendship in m~ -,ad plight. 
\Ve were sick with the samt )earning, 
Our dreams were gloomy and long, 
We •hispered about the davs of old 
W'hen we were young and hope wa" strong. 
go 
I made a copy of it and wrote above it: "Dedicated 
to my &iend Heinrich Muoth." 
Then I \went to sec: him at a time when I knew he 
would be \t home. I heard him i,inging ai, ~ walked 
up and down reheaning in hi,; i,tatcl) room;, He received 
me coolly. 
"Good heavens, it',; Mr. Kuhn! I thought you would 
not come any more." 
"Well," I !laid, "here I am. How are )Ou?" 
•:The same ai, ever. Good of ,ou 10 come and see me 
again." 
"\'cs, I haven't been u·n Im.al rr·u·ntl} . . " 
"It has been ven c,idc·nt and I know wh,." 
"I don't thtnk i.o."' 
"Yes, I do. I.ottil· once went to 'it'C ,ou. didn't i,he?" 
"''••~. hut I don't want to tJlk about it." 
"It isu'r lt .1II nl0<l'.,.,,1n. An,"a,, hc1c }OU .i.re again." 
"J have brought -.omething with ml'." 
I gave hi111 the mmic." 
"Oh, r1~'W song' Th.tt i,; good. I \\J<, afraid ,nu 
might llcvotc vour.,df ,;olel} to drcan string music. 
The1e'o; a dedication on it .alread). \\'hat. to 1m·' llo 
}O,u ml'an it?" 
I wa,; ,;urp11.,cd thal i1 o;ecmcd to ghc him 'IO much 
pll":nure. I had -.omehow ex pee tcd J joke about the 
dcclk,ttion. 
"Of c-our~ I am pk.1-.l-cl," he -.aid .. incereli. "i am 
alwa," glad whl'll worth while people thinl of me. and 
parti6ularly \Ou. I h.td n•alh i.truck )OU off the lii,t." 
"Have ,ou a li111t :" 
"Oh )Co;, when one h.io; or h,1,; h,ul .io; 1'111°' friends 
ai, I ..• I could make 9uitc a cat.1.logue. I ha\oc alwa,s 
91 
thought most of the highly moral ones and thme are 
just the ones wbo diw:,ird me. One can find friends 
amongst r,lscals any d.ty, but it is dilficulf to do so 
amongst ,,idealists and ordinary people if /,one ha• a 
reputation. You arc the only one at the-moment. Aud 
the wa} thin~ .trl" going--- J>t.·oplc like bt."'lt what 
is hard for them to ob1.1in! Don't ,on agree? I h.ne 
alwa)S wanted friendi. but it ha., alw,,,., been ~omen who 
have been attr.atted to me." 
"That ii. palll} ,our own t.ault, MA-Muoth." 
"Wh, ?" 
"You liL.e to treat all people .... ,on llo \\omeu. Jt doe-s 
not worL. with fric.•ndi. .md th,tt i .. ,, h, the, leave vou. 
You are .an egoi'>t." 
"Thank goodm·,., I am. What i, mmc, )OU arc too. 
\\'hen that dreadful Lottie.· poured out her t.1le of woe 
to )OU, ,ou didn't help hc.·1 in .am \\,1,. You al"'> didn't 
'"make the incident an c.·,cu<,C frn convu 1i11g me, for whi< h 
I am grateful. Thf' .1lf.tir g,l\c }OU .a feeling of a,e1 .. ion 
and )OU L.ept a\\a\ from me" 
"Well, here I am ag,un. \on arc right, I ,hould have 
tried to help Lottie, but I don't mulu,tand these thinw,. 
She her!lelf lauglu·d J.l me ,md told me I didn't undet­
sttnd amthing about love." 
"Well, }OU keep to friend .. hip. It i, .11 .. n ,1 good i,phcrc.·. 
Now we'll -studv the i,ong; 11it dmu1 aud pla, the .ic<.0111-
panimenJ.- Do ,ou 1cmember how it wa., with ,our h1.,r 
one? It look, .. ., if ,ou are gradualh becoming famou\." 
"Thing.. are improving but I witl nc,cr cat<h UJl with 
)Oll," 
"Noni,er-. ! You are a tompo..cr, d ueator, a littlt• 
god! What is fame to you? People like me have 10 pres." • 
9.1 
on to get anywhere. Singers and tight-rope walkers have 
lO do the same a'I women, take their good'I to the market 
while they\a,re ~till in good condition. Fame up to the 
hilt, and m'ney, wine and c.hampagnc:! J>hotctp"aph~ in 
rhe newspaper,, and bouquet.,! I tell you, 0if I hccame 
unpopular today, or perhap'I had a little inffammarion 
of the lung,;, I would b<· fmi,;h<'d tomorrow. and fame 
ancl bouc1ucu, and all the rest would come 10 an abrupt 
end." 
"9h, don't worry about that until it happl'm,." 
"Do you know. tm vc·n c uriom ahout i,rtowing old. 
Youth is a real 'twimlll· -a 'twindl<." of th<· P1<·.,~ and text­
bool..s ! The mo.,t wonderful time· of one\ life! Yet old 
people al"a"'.,t·cm much moH· ,cmtenred IO me. Youth 
is the mo.'tl difhc·uh rime of life. For example, suicide 
rar• h cxc ur., among.,, old pcopl<-." 
I bt•gau •o plav the: pi.mu and he· turned hi., attention 
10 tl1e song. He qui, kl~ learned the mclcxh and ,ta\e mt!' 
an appr<'ciativc nudge with hi, clho}, .n a plaC"t· where 
it returr d •ignific.anth from a minor to a major ke}, 
When 1. arrived home in the e,cninf{. I fc,und, as I had 
kared, an cmclopc from !\fr. Inuhor contdining a short, 
friendly note and .i. more than !luh,;tantial fee. I ,;ent the 
m,jney hack and t'nclo .. cd a note ,;a\"in,t I wa'l quite 
('()mfortabh off and pn·f<'rrcd to be allowed to ,isit his 
house as a friend. \\7ht·n I o;aw him again. hl' im itC'd me 
to comt• ancl visit him again ,;oon and .. aid: "I thol~ght 
vou would feC'l likc that about it. (,t·rrrude said •1 ~hould 
not ,;ind ,ou an,·thing. but I thou~ht I would. just the 
sanu.•." 
'.From that tim<' I wa ... a ,·en frequent ~ue,t• Imthor's 
house. I p1a}ed the first violin part at mam concerts 
9j 
there. I brought new music with me, my own -nd other 
people's, -and most of my shorter work.a were tint per­
formed there. 
· One aJternoon in spring I found Gertnµe at home 
alone. It was raining and as I had slipped on the front 
step on leaving, she would not let me go immediately. 
We discussed music, and then it happened almost unin­
tentionally that I began to talk to her confidentially, in 
particular about the grim period I had gone through, 
during which I had composed my fir,t songs. Then I • • felt embarrassed and did not L.now whether I had been 
wi'H: in making thi'S confc'S,ion to the girl. Gertrude 
said to me almost timorous!): "I have something to 
confess which I hope }'OU will not tJL.enmis'i. I have 
made copies of two of )<>Ur song,; :md leJrned th("m." 
"Do you sing?" I t>xdaimed with surprist·. At. the 
same time I remembered with ammt·ment the im id<•nt 
•of m) first )OUthful lo,e, and how I heJr<l ht:r sinp, so 
badly. 
Gertrude smiled .ind nodded: "Oh H'"· I .. in~. although 
only for one or t\\O friend,; and for m, own plc:,.,urc. 
I will sing ,our .. Ollb" if ,ou \\ill auompam mt· nn the. 
piano." 
_\\'c w,·nt to the pidno and .. he h,md<'d me tlu· mmi, 
which she had <.opicd in her neat, feminine haml. I 
began the ac< omp.inimcnt softh· o,o that I could li,ten 
to ht>r .eropcrly. !-the 'i,mg on<· 'Song, then another, ,md J 
listened• and h<'ard Ill) mu'ti< changed and 1ra11 .. formed. 
She sang in a high, pure ,oi<c, and it wa .. the S'feetest 
thing I had ever bc.ird 111 ID} life. Hl"r voice went 
through tar like the o;outh wind acro~'i a snow covei\"tl 
vallcv, and ever)' nott> made my heart £eel lighter. 
94 
Although I felt happy and almost ai; if floating on air, 
I had to control m)i,clf, for there were tears ht m) t•)CS 
which neally obliterated the mu11ic. 
I thougl\ I had known what love wa\, an~ had felt 
wise in my knowledge. I had looked at the world with 
new eye, and felt a c.lo'>cr l.inr,hip toward\ aJI people. 
Now it was different; now then:: wa\ no longer light, 
solace and plc.u,urc, hut i,torm ,md flame. 1\h heart now 
exulted, beat more quid..l) and did not want to J..now 
annhing more ;,.bout life; It jtM Wdnf('d to con,ume 
itself in it'I 0~11 ftime. If amom· had now ar,J..ed me 
what love wai,, I r,hould h.t,e hc-('n .tble to dei,cribe it, 
and it would have i;ounded ardent Jnd tumultoui;. 
In the meaatimc. I could lu.•,,r GC'rtrude\ ,oice ni;ing. 
It seemed to ,.111 me and wi'>h to n•hc me pleasure, and 
Vf'' i, 11;oared to remote hdglw,, in,,ue,..,it,Je and ahnmt 
ahen tom• I now und<'l'>to<>d ho" thing-, \\ere with me. 
She. could .. ing, he fricndh, Jnd nu·an well with me 
but all thi'> wai, not wh.11 I wanted. Jf ,he uruld not tJe 
mine air ,c-., omplcteh and fore,cr, then I lhed m ,·am, 
and evu~thing that w,n good ancl fmt· Jnd genuine in 
me had no me.aniug. 
I then felt her hand on m, "houlder. I w.1-, startled, 
turned round .md looked at her. Her bright e,c,; Jool..ccl 
seriom, and onh after a .. ho1 t time. a,; I continut•d to 
ga1e at her, did i,he 'lmile 'IWt'eth and bJmh 
I could onll ,;a, thanl.. ,ou She did not J..now \\hat 
was the matter with me. She onh 1c-ah'<'<I th~t I was 
deep)¥ affected and tactfulh pie 1..ed up the threads of 
our previous pleasant, eas~-ffowing rnmersation. I left 
slft>rtl} afterwards. 
I went home and did not know \\hether it was stiJJ 
95 
raining. I Wcllkcd through the streets leaning on my 
stick, and yet I did not 1eally walk and the streets 
seemed unreal. I travelled on stormy dou+s .t< 1 O'lS a 
thangin~darkened sky. I talked to tht' stofm and WdS 
myself the storm, and above me in the remote di.,tan<e, 
I hod an illusion o( hearin~ <,omcthing. It w.is .i woma11'11 
high, sweet voice and it .,cem<"d quite immune from 
human thoughb and emotion .... md tet ,lt the ... unc time 
it seemed to have all the "ild s"e<'tne.,., of p.i.,-,ion in it'I 
C'l'ICnCC. 
That evening I !oat in m, room ..\ithuut ,l h~ht A., 
I could not endure 1t .irn lon~u it ",1., ,1lr<',uh Luc-I 
went to Muoth\ home I found h1., \\11tdow., in d,1rL.neu 
and turned bacL.. I \\,tiled Jhu111 for .1 loog time in th" 
night, and hnalh found mHclf, \\Urih conun~ b,1< l to 
earth. out\idc the lmthor .. · g,uden rht• old net·., 1 uo,tlt•d 
i,olemnh .tround tht con<eJlt•d hon.,t• from \\hid1 no 
·.ound or light pt netr.itcd, .ind p,1le \t.th cmergt'fl here 
d:'ld there among the doud., 
I \\.tiled ..e,eral d.1H hcforc I H 111m«I 10 go and "t't' 
Gertrude a~.iin I>urm~ 1h1., 11111t' I rt.'C"t 1ved J l<·11t•r 
from tht· poet \\ho-,t. poem-, I h,ul o,t t lo 111m1t \\'c• h,ul 
commumc.t.lt·d \\1th t•,1cl1 otlu r lot t\\o \<"Jr\ ,tnd 1 
OCf.t\lOn,llh fl'l.<'I\ cd llll<"rt """~ lcll< i.. fwm 1nm I .,cnt 
him nn mu,.u and he "l'III me 111., po, m., I It 110\\ ll<IOt<.· 
D('ar ~1r, 
I h.ne not \\llltt·n to ,on fm .. onw tune I ha,c 
b'ct·n H'f\ bm) I.-,er \lll(C I h.ne bcunnl' fJmiha1 
with ,our mmi,, I hdvt· h,rd .1 tc1i.t m m111d fm • ,ou, but it \\ould not fmm w1t·lf No\\ I h.ne 
it iiJ1d It • ., ahno\t reach h 1-, .1 hhrt 110 for ,111 
opera, and ,ou mu.,t <<>mpmt• tht· mn.,i< fm 11 
q6 
I galher you arc not a particularly happy person; 
that is revealed in your music. I will not speak 
aboJt myself, but this text is just for you. As there 
is nothing else to ma!..<· u, rejoice, le~ u, present 
l)omething good to the publii, which for moments 
will make· it dear even to those who are thkk­
,kiunc·cl. that life i!> 1101 lht·d ju"lt on the "IUrface. 
As we• do not n·ally know where to begin ourselves, 
it worrie., 11,; to be awar<' of the waned poweri, 
of otht•r"I. 
\'our,;, Ham H. 
It fdl lil..t· a '>park in ~unpowdt•r. I wrote for the 
libretto and was '>O impatient that I tore up my letter 
and '>Cnt a tdtgram. The mam.1,cript arrh·ed a week 
later. It wa, a [>J'l'iionatc lovt' ,101 y ,Hitten in \'erse. 
·r• .. r wc·re still gap'> in it. hut it was suffident for me 
for the 1i .It' hc·i11g. I H·ad it and went about with the 
, CT&e!, going through 111, head. I sang them and tried' 
music to them 011 thl' , iolin clay and night. Shortly 
aftrrw;,• '!> i w1·111 tn ,ce Gt·rtrucle. 
"You must help nw," I cried. "I am composing an 
opera. Here art· thn•c..· '>Oil~., suitahle for your ,oke. 
\\'.ill ,ou have a look at tht·m and ,;ing them for mt" 
some time?" 
She seemed ,·en-plt·a,cd, a,ked me to rell her ahout 
it, glanu·tl at the um,it and prmni,c·,1 to karn the "lpngs 
soon. Then followed a wonderful, fruitful periocl. intox­
k.ttcd with low and mmil. I wa" im ap.ahle of thinking 
of an)·thing cl'IC'. .md G,·nrudc wa,; the onh one who 
knew m, i.e< n•t about the opera. I took the music lo 
h:r and she lcartl<'d it and sang it. I comultel'fter about 
it, played ev<.-ryrhing to her. and she shared my cnthus-
1> 97 
iasm, studied and sang, advised and helped me, and 
enjoyed 'the secret and the growing work that belonged 
to us both. There was no point or suggcstioh which she 
did not ,immediately understand and assimilate. Later, 
she began to help m~ with copying and re-writing music 
in her neat hand. I had taken sick-leave from the theatre. 
No feeling of embarr:mment arose hetwecn Gertrude 
and 1-,ve were swept along by the same currf'nt and 
worked for the saml' end. It was for her, as it was for 
me, the blossoming of maturing powen, a peri,pd of 
happiness and magic in which my passions worked un­
seen. She did not distinguish hetWl'l'll me and rny work. 
She found pleasurl" in us hoth and hdongl·d to us both. 
For me, too. love and work, mm,i( anlt Jifr. W('fl' no 
long<.T separahle. Sonll'timc•11 I lcK>kt'<I at the lovely girl 
with astoni,;hmcnt and admiration. and !>he would n·tur11 
my glance, and whcncvt'r l callll' 01 dt·partl·d. '>he pressecl 
'my hand more warmly and firmh 1h.1n I ,·t·mnr<"d to 
press hers. An"cl whenever I wall..C:"d thronAh thl' garden 
and entered the old homu· clnring them· mild 11priug 
days, I did not know whetht•r it w:l', m, work or my Ion· 
which impc;lled and exalted Inl'. 
Times like tho,e do not la,;t 1011g. Thi!> one wai. 
approaching the end, and the flam<· within Ill<' steadil~ 
flared up again into confused dt•c,in·,. I !1:lt at hC"r piano 
and she sang the I.u,t a<·t of m~ opera. of which the 
sopranr part was nnnpleted. Sht· 'lang ht·,mtifull~. and 
while Gertrude'!> ,oice still soarl'd, I rl'ff('Cted upon the 
glorious days whid1 I (eh w<.T<". already changin1~. and 
knew that incvitablv different and mort· doudt•d da\S 
were on •·1,e way. Then !>he smiled at me and lea11l'd 
to,rards me in connet·tion with the music. She notkc.-d 
98 
the sad expres.ion on my £ace and looked at me question­
ingly. I dil not say anything. I stood up, held her face 
gently in both hands, ki11!1Cd her on the forehead and on 
the mouth and then 11:it down again. She ~rt1itted all 
this quietly and almost ,;olemnly, without 11urprise or 
annoyance, and when she 11aw tears in my eyes, she 
gently 11troked my hair, forehead and shoulder with her 
so£ t, 110100th hand. 
Then I began to play LhC' piano and ,he ,ang again, 
~nd.&.'1.e ki11., and t~Jt wonderful hour rcmaint'd unmen­
tionedthough unforgotten hl·tY.cen ma-. our hnal secret. 
The other ,ec.ret could not r,•mJin between u, much 
longer; the opera now required othet pc·ople and a,sis­
tanto,. The h1' one mmt he· Muoth, a-. I had thought 
of him for the principal c.h.u acte1, who.,e impetuosity 
.,,it. vi.,lent emotion, could well be interpreted with 
Muoth'!:. ,JicC' .md pen,oualit\. I clela,·ed doing am thing 
for a 11hort time. Mv work wao, 'itill J bond betweerl 
(.ertrucll· and r It hc.·lungcd to m both and brought 
u, bot' ult..i .. urt."" and care,. It wa .. hle a garden which 
was unknown to Jll\-OD<' else, m J -,hip nn \\hich we two 
alone.· <.rO..'IC'd a ~t."at ocean. 
Siu· J-.1.cd mt." about it hct,elf \\ hen ,he felt and saw 
th.1t 11hc could not help me furthc.•r. 
"Who will -.ing the ptindpc1l part?" ,i;he asked. 
"Hcimith !\luoth." 
She -.eemc.·d "m p11,ed. 
"Oh," 11hc ,i;.1id. ".ire ,ou -,eriom? I don't like him." 
"llr i,i; a friend of mine, Mi,11 Gertrude, and he would 
be 'lt1it.1ble for th<' part." 
• .. oh 1" 
A stranger had already come between m. 
9~} 
V 
Mcanwhill", I had not thought about Muoth's holidays 
and love of tra,·elling. I le wa, wry plea!il'd ahout my 
plans for an opera and promised to help me as m1.H.h a, 
possible, but hl" was <>C<upied with travelli11g plans and 
could only promise to go through his part for the a1llumn. 
I copied it out for him :1, for as it was ready. He took it 
with him and as usual I did not hear amthing from him 
all those months. 
So we obtained a rl"spite. A vt'ry pl(•a11a11t relation'lhip 
now existed between Gertrmlt· and I. I believe tb:1t - 'since that time at the piano, she knew <1uite well what 
was going on insidt· me, hut !lht· m·,·t·r !laid a word and 
was not differc.·nt with mt· in am wa\. Siu· did not only 
like my mu!lic, she likl"d nw too, and fell ai. I did, that 
there was a natural S)'lllpath} bt•twt·t·n U!I and a fc•cling • 
of mutual understanding and :1tlcnion. lfrr ht·ha,·iour 
towards me was therefore L.incl and friend)~. hut without 
passion. At times, that wa,; sutlide111 for m<" :uul I spent 
quiet, contented days in her compam. but passion always 
· soon a .. ..,se as the additional ra,·tor h(•tw(•<·n u,, and hl"r 
friendliness then seemt-d onh-likt• d1arit~ to me. and it 
tormented me to !IC<" that the wa~•t•s of lo,·<· and,dt•'lir<" 
which overpowered me, were alien and disah'TC(•ahlt• to 
her. Oftf 1 I decein.'CI ID)'W-lf and tri(·d to pero;uatle 1m· 
self ~"iat she had a pladd, upcmotional tempt·rament. 
100 
Yet in my heart I felt it was not true. and I knew 
Gertrude ,well enough to know that Jove would also 
bring her hazards and l1 tumult of emotions. I often 
thought about it later, and I felt that if I hud1laken her 
by 11torm, fought for her, and drawn her to me with all 
my strt·ngth, she would have· foJJow<·d me and gone with 
me for good. But I mi,tru.,tccl }JCT plcai,;mt manner 
towardi, me, and when she was gentle and showed affec­
tion for nu·, I attributed it to the mual undesired 
's~ut_i,:.•,h,. I rnultt not ricl myi,clf of the thought that if 
i,he had'lit-ed a ht·althy, attra<.tivc man as much ar, she 
liked me·, ,he could not have maintained the relationship 
011 this qni<"t, frit·ndh ha11i~. Jt w.1, then not rare for me . , 
to i,pcnd hour., frding that I would ha,<· exchanged my 
mn•i< a11d all that wa'I of ,aim· to me for a i,traigbt leg 
:11,cl a ~-• \ di'lp<>,ition. 
About that time Td,t•r du·w < lo,<·r to nu· again. J-te 
l'·a,· incti,pem.ahle for 111, wor J.. •• md ,o hc wai, the next 
om• tn 1, ,ff" my i.ecrc·1 ,md bt·c nm~ familiar with the 
lihrcttc, .,cl m) plam for .m opt·ra. lfr wa-, ,cry discreet 
about it all and took thc work home to Mmh. \\'hen he 
<am<· a~:,in, hi!> chilclliJ..c fate with it, fair ht·:1rd beamed 
with plca,un· and c,dtt·ment ahout thl· mm,ic. 
"That npl•r,t of ,our, i, ~dng to he good:" he ex­
clainll'd with t·xcitcml·nt. "I can aln·,uh feel the O\'er­
turc in m, finger-tip,: ~ow, let\ go and ha,·c a drink, 
~ou ra'IC al. If it Wl'Tt' not tun pn•i,umptious. , would 
imggcst that v.c drink .t pkdgc of brotherhood-but it 
must not hl· cnforn·d." 
I willin~l~ :uc.·t·ptt·c 1 tlw imi1.11ion ·md we had a 
pleai,;mt cH·niuA togt·ther. For tht• first time t,•iser took. 
me home with him. lli• sii.tt•r. who had been left alone 
101 
at her mother's death, had recently come to live with 
him. Teiser could not speak highly enough tabout the 
comfort of his changed household after his long bachelor 
yean. HI· ,ister was a quiet, pleasant girl, with the 
same bright, childlike e,e11 ao, hl·r brother. Sht• was called 
Brigitte. She brought us <·.a.kes and cleat AlHtrian wine, 
also a box of large Virginia cigars. Wt• drank the f1r11t 
glass of wine to her health and tht• i.t•cmul to nm good 
friendship, and while Wl' ate call•,;, drank wine and 
smoked, Teiser moved <klightedl\' ahcru the roo111 -;:•irst • 
he sat down hv the piano, then on tht• .,t•ttec ~ith a 
guitar. then at the rnd of tht· t.ibll· with hi,; ,iolin, and 
pla~·ed an}·thing pltw,ant that w,,., gninq, through hio, 
head. He ,;ang too, and hi,; briP,ht e,e11 ,;parkled and it 
was all a trihutt• to ml' .and to the opera. l1 ,;eemed that 
his sister had the same blood in ht•r ,ein,; and ,;wore no 
lps by Mozart than he cliil. Aria .. from 'The Magk 
Flute' and excerpt,; from 'Don (;im·.rnni', intt·rruptt-cf 
now and then ll\ tom·e, .. ation .md thl' clinJ..in~ of 
gla11'1es, ec.hot.-d throup_h the littlf' home, hcautifullv 
accompanied h, her brother on the· , inlin. pi.ino or 
guitar. or e,cn jmt b} whi .. tling · 
• I was still engaged a,; a ,·iolini-.t in tht• nrd1e.,tra for 
the short summer .. ea,;on, hut had a .. kt•d for m, rdt•a:ie 
in the autumn as I wi,;hecl to devote all my time and 
energy to m,· work. The c·onrluc101. who w:ti, annmt'll 
because''I was leaving, wa., veq rml<' to nu· toward" the 
end, but Teiscr helped mt· greath· to ,kftond myself and 
to rise above it. 
With the help o( thi,; lo)·al fri<•ml, I worked at tl;'e 
instrumerication of my op<'ra, and while re,;pccting ml' 
. ideas, he rigorously put hi'I finr;cr on an-y crror'5 in the 
IOI 
treatment of the orchestration. Often he became quite 
annoyed Md rebuked me like an out,;poken conductor 
until the doub1ful pa:r::t '4hic.h I had liked and wished to 
retain was <rmsed out and altered. He wa-, al.fays ready 
with cxampl<'s whcne\ er J wa,; in doubt. \Vhcn I presented 
r-omcthing ,m,ati!,fa< toril~ or war, not vcnture<,ome 
enough, he < illlll' running to me with \C.on·-. and c,howed 
me how Mo,art or I.oruing would have handled it, and 
inferred that my hc·,i1,1tiu11 v..i-. cowardic.e, or m, ob,;tin-
'acr, ... ~dadou, i.t,.pi,li•~· \\'c hcllowcd at cac.h other, 
disput,·chmd J,'TCW c·xcitcd, and if it o«uncd in Teir.cr',; 
hou,c:, 8rigit1t• li,tcncd tom attentively. rnmt· to and fro 
with wine and cig.1r,. aml ,nmothc·d out m.,m crumpled 
i.h<•er, of mmif <,trrfulh and .,,mpathctic :1lh. Her admir­
ation for m<· w.1, c·,1ual to hc·r afft·c tion for her brother; 
tc, h'-·r I w.i., a mac,tro. 1-.H·n ~und.1, I \\.1, imited to 
lumh at th<' Td .. t•r\ .. \f1,·1 •lw UH:',tl, C'H·n if there wis 
onh a tim him· pard1 in tht· .. i..,. Wl' \\l.lll for a ridt· out 
by tra111 \\'e then \\.1IJ..c·d nH·r the: hill, and through Lh<' 
wood"· t,,Jlcd .md ,.111~. and the rei.,er., frequently 
}txldled in thc·1r natiH· f.i.,hion. 
\\'c one e ,topJll'd for ., li~ht mc.1I in tht· ~ardcn of a 
,·illaAt' inn from \\ht·H· till' mcin mmic o( a countn 
d,tnll' dlift,·d aom, to 11, thwugh wide opt•n windows. 
\\'ht•n Wl' had l"atc·n .md ,.11 rc,ting-m er our cider, 
Bri~itt<" -,lipped at roi,, to the homt• .ind went in,ide·. \\"c 
wall ht·d hc.·r do thi, and lllKlll ~,ttcr we i.aw h ... "t dance 
pa,t tlw window, .,., f1c.·,h ,rnd .. paJl,ling .1, ,t i,ummcr 
morning. \\'hc.·n .,}Jc.' n·tu .. m·d. ·r <"l'lcr !ihool.. his finger at 
f\er .md said sh<• .. h01,fd haH' .1,J..cd him to go along too. 
She then blmhcd ,md ht'l,unc emhauatii.cd, ~hool. her 
head protcr,tingh and Icv1led at me. 
IOj 
.. What•~ the matter?" asked her brother. 
"Nothing," she said, but by chan<"e I sa\t how she 
made him realise the significtncc 0£ her glance, and 
Tciser sai\f :, "Oh, of course!" 
I did not say an} thing, but it sc..-cmcd str.mgl' to Jill' to 
sec· her cmharrass<·d hc..'t·ame shl" had dann•d whik I w.i" 
tJ\erc. For the firi1t timl" it OC<"Ufft'<I to ml" that thl'ir 
walks al'to would ha,·c been qui< k<·r and longer if I had 
not been tbt'rc to re,.tri< t them, and after that tinu-I 
only joined thl'm Offa .. ionally on their ,~uml.,y l''-< uJ.M,,.mi.. • 
\\'hen we had gonl' throu~h the ,opr:1110 pa1." .i .. far a'> 
possible. Gertrude noti,ed that I w,,., n•l\u 1.mt to ~ivc 
up my frequent ,i.,it'> to hl·r and 0111 pll•,,,.mt time'> 
together at the pfano. aml \l't th,ll J \\~a-. too ,II\ to 
mak.c cxcu"''" for their «mtinu.itinn. I w:l'> 'IUrpri'it"cl 
when sbe suggested that I <,hould \ i,it her n·~ular h to 
accompanv her ,in~ing, and I now w,•nt to ht·r hntN' 
two or three time .. a Wl"l.'k in tht• .,ftl'fll()IIJI,;, lkr fatlll'r 
was pleased at h,·1 friend,hip with ml'. Gerund,· h,ul 
lthl her mother ,,hl·n ,lw "•'" ,till ,011111~: ,ht· l\a, mi,tn•,;-, 
of the home and lll'r f,1thl•J kt ht•J h,l\t' llt'r m,11 W,I\ in 
e,eqthin~ .. 
· The g.inlen wa,; in it, f nil ,plt·mlom. It :1hou11dl·d 
with Hower,. and bird-, s.mg arouml the quit·t hmm·. 
\\"hen I cnten·d the gardl'n lrom th<· road and w,·nt 
pai.t the old, clarkerlt'd o,tatm·, in th<· drht· tow.ml., the 
creeper"!oven·d hou,e, ii wa., for llll' t·.1d1 1 inw Iii,.<' 
entering a sanctuary, when• thl· ,ni<c., .uul thing., of th<· 
world could only pcrwtrate to a .,fight exu·nr. Th<· bt•<"'I 
hummed among the flowering hmht•<; in front of 1tv 
window'i . ..rsuu.,hine filled 1ht· soom, producing light 
reft«~ions of the foliag,·. I o,at,.,ll the piano and heard 
101 
G,•rtrude .. ing. I lii,tl'm·d to her voice which ro .. e l'a-.ily 
and witlu\ut effort and when, afu·r .i .. ong, we looked at 
ea«,h otll('r and .. miled, i1 wa-. in a unitt·d and confiding 
way a-. if ht•tw,·cn brother and -.i-.Lcr. I often fs;,lt at thci,e 
times th,tl I h,td 0111) lo .,,r,·tc.h out my h.1~1d., ro 1,rr.1-.p 
DJ) happim·-.-. ,tnd haH· i1 for good, and wt I did not do 
.,o bt:c,m-.e I \\,lllt<'cl to \\,tit until ,ht· .1l .. n ,howed ,ome 
i,ig11 of dc .. i1<· cllld l011gi11~ But Gt·rttmlt· ',l'l'lllt'd to he 
, 011ll'lllt·d ,tnd nut ro "j.,Ja fm .tll) thin~ ehc. Indeed, 
•il r_,ften <,t•t•mt·d ro 111<· 1h.1t .,he diri not \\hh to .. hatter 
thii, pt•J'.•;.ful id,tt~omhip ,lllcl cll',tlllh the '>prin~•time of 
0111 fric·ncl,hip 
If I \\-,l'> di ... tppoilllf d ,thout 1111 ... 11 \\,h cl (Oll'>C>l.tuon 
to mt• to luow. hem deq,h "hl c .1u·cl tor m, mu .. u. how 
\\IC'II .,he umlc l'>IOod .111<1 \\,l'> p1n11d of ir. 
( hi., '11,llt· of ,tlf,un I.1,trd until Jum· I hl'n Gt·rtrude 
.11111 ht·r hthu ,,,·m ofl into tlH' 111011111,tim I r<.mc1ined 
hcJ1i11rl and \\h<·m·H·r I \\cut p,to,t hL·r hou-.,·, I saw 1t 
.,,,uuhu~ cmpr, hthind tht· pi.me. uet•., .• rnd the ~ate 
w,,., lo, ' c·c' I ht· p,1111 1 t'I III m tl. gn·,\ .md f ollow<'d me 
right ; .,o the ui~ht. 
In tht· c,t•11i11~., I \\Ctlt to tht· ·1 t'l'ot'r" .,hno .. t .1lwa\'I 
,, uh 11111 .. u in 111, t .1,,. ,uul .. h.u ul tht.it tl'1k1. con tented 
"'•" of hk. I tlr.mL. their \mui.111 \\irw and pl,nccl 
Mcu.ut '4.ith tht·m \ftt·r" ,·cl., I w.1llcd h.1ck in the 
mild ni~h,.,, "•'" tnnpl<., ,,.ailing .ihout m the park-., 
wc:nl hmm· \\t·,uih tu lwd hnl cw1ld not .,lt:'t·p.Ii \\35 
now imonu•l\,1hlc· tn 1m· th.11 I «mid h,l\C hch.ned m 
'!IU<h .1 hrnthr1h f.t.,hitm ltm.1111., (yt•rtnult•. and that I 
h,1d ut'\l'I lnol..t·n do\\n ,ht h.nric-1. dr.1wn her to me. 
t~lt·n hc-r II\ .,,orm ,uul \\Oil hu I «•uld i•_.1gim· h<'r 
in ht•r light him· nr grc-, <ill'""· mt·ri, m 'ICtiou.,, I could 
u,-., 
hear her voice, and could not conceive ever havh1g heard 
it without being filled with ardour and desir;-to make 
love to her. Restless and agitatl-d I rose, switched on the 
light and threw myself into my work. 1 made human .... voices and mstruments woo, plead and threaten. I re 
peated the song of yearning in new, h.t.unting mdo<lico,. 
Often this comfort .t.1110 was lacking to me. Aftcrward, 
I lay in bed, ardent and re&tles,, in a st.ite of wretchl."<I 
sleeplessness. I uuercd her name, Gertrude, Gertrude, 
wildlv and sem,elcssl}, thru11t ,olal.C and hopl' a,idc-.iJnd • 
surrendered m)o,cl( de.,pc1it ingh to thi dH•adfu! ·{>ino,tr .1 
tion of desire. I uied out to God ,uul ,1"1..ul llim wln 
He had made me thi, w.1,. win lie hc1d 111.ull· mt• .i 
cripple, and wh, imte.id of tht• h.tppine.,,. th.it w,t., thC' 
lot of the poorco,t of mm t.il.., I k h,ul ~hen nu· nnthin~ 
but the terrible o,ulal.c-of lhiug in ,t whirl of ,omul., 
where, in the £.tee ol nn dc-;itc,, l <n111inu.1lh dcpt<ted 
t}.e unatt.iin.iblc- 111 .,,range f,mt,t'>it•, 
During the d.n I wa, moll' '>u«ci..,ful in <otllrollmg 
my emotions. I dcnched m, teeth. ,.u .11 m, \\otl.. h,un 
the earl} hour'> of th(' morning, l.Jlmt·d m,.,<·lf tn 1,11..in~ 
long wall,; and rcfrc,h('cl 111\',elf with <0l<l ,hoW('I h.11h ... 
In the cvcningi. I fled fwm the ,h.ulo"., of the ,tppro,u h 
ir!,g night,; to the l.hce1ful comp.im of the J"d.,cr,, with 
,~hom I obtained .1 few hour., of rl''>I ,md ,;ometlme, 
plea<,ure. Tei,t·1 noticed that I \\,1' 11! .111<1 ,utlt•rm~ ,md 
put it ~1wn to .ill the worl. I k .ich i'>l'cl m<· to 1 t:'>l ,t 
while, although he him'idt \\a'i full of cnthu'>1,1,m •• mcl 
inwardh was a'> <·'\.cited and i1np,ttit·nt ,l'> I w.i, on 
seeing the opera grow. 'iomt•timc., I .al'><> < .illt·d for him 
and i-pent;n c,cning with him alone in the cool g.mlt.,1 
of i-,omc inn, but e,en lh<'n I Wcl'> di\1tubcd by the .. ight 
1o6 
of the yqung lovers, the Chinese lantern,; and fireworks, 
and the 'ccling of love in ~he air whi<.h always hovers 
ov,·r town'> on i,ummcr <.femng,;. 
It was wont of all Jhen Tcir.cr al"', went awav to 
•pc:nd his holidays with Brigi11c walking amclty"; the m~un­
taius. I le im, itt·d m<· to come: along too, and he meant 
it scriou,1), although mv inabi1it) to move about easily 
would have· ,poilt hii, pk,1'urc; but I wuld not acc.ept 
hh irnit;.1tion. 
For t\\o y•cek, 1 n·mai1 ■cd in town alone, miserable 
and l. ·,able 10 o,fh•p, and I did 1101 male any further 
pro~re.,., ?vi1h m, worl. 
Then Gertrmk ',('Ill rill' a .. mall box full of Alpine 
ro'le'I from 3e \illJ~t• in \\'alli ... \\"ht'n I '>aw her hand­
writing aml unpa<ll'd thl· hro"nhh, fading flowers, it 
w,,r,, likt• a glanu· ftom her dc,ir cw-. ;md I fdt a,hamcd 
of Ul} ,Ll!ilatio11 an I l,1c I,. of confhlt."nu· I clec1cled it was 
h~·ttcr for lu·r to !..now how I felt, Jnd tlH· nc·,t morning 
I wrote ht•r ,1 ,hurl lettt·r. I told her hc1lf-joli11gl~ that 
I u,ul,' r >l -.lt·t·p .uul that it wa,· thro111th lou~ing for 
h<'T, ... l tha1 I coul,I no lon~t·r ju.-.t he friendl~ with 
ht·r. a-. I wa, in lt>H' with he1. While \\ riting I wai, again 
o,·erum1c h, Ill\ t•nu,1ion, ancl the letter, whith had 
i.t,trlt•d mildh ,md almmt je,tingh. ended impctuousl} 
autl ardcnth. 
Almrn,t cH·r> dJ\ the pn,1 brought mt· 1,rrt-ctings an,I 
pi<.tutl•-pm1tard-. from till' Teher,. who naturall~ ·could 
not J..uow th,tt their ur<l, ,md letter, hroughr--me dis­
appoi11tml'lll ead1 time, for I w,n waitin~ for post from 
someone diic·. 
~ It t,1me at l.1,t, ., ~<·, t·nvelopt' with Gutrude's clear, 
flo\\ing handwriting on it .• md in,;idc wa-. a frtter. 
Wj 
M )' dear friend, 
Your letter has embarrassed me. I re,iisc thal 
you are i,uftering, olherwr.· I would scofd )OU for 
attacking me in this wa . You I.now I am very 
fonc\ 6f )OU, but I am quite contt'nted wilh mv 
pre,c.·r.1 state and have .&'!i )Cl 110 dc-,irl' to change.• 
it. If I thought there wa,; am d,rng,·r ol lo,ing 
)OU, I would do c.•veq1hing po.,.,iblc IO prevent it. 
But I c.111 ghe no tc-ph to your ardent lt•ttc1. Re 
pJtic.•111, let thing, 1·cmain helwc.·cn tl'l .1, the.·~ wc-n· 
until we can 'lc.•c.• ,·.uh <>1hc.·1 Jg,1lla Jnd 1,1U,..chi11g-. 
o,er. E,·er)lhing \\ill thc.·n be c.·.1-.i,·1 ,,. 
Yom, ,tO<·< tirm,u,·h. 
Gc.·111,ml,·. 
It hJd ,lltt·tnl the.· pmilion H'I\ littlt· ,mcl H'I the ll·ttc.·r 
made me happier .. \hc.·1 JII, ir \\,t., .1 i.;u·,·1111~ fwm het: 
she had permitted ml' to 111.11.l' .1 dc·d.11 .111011 of lnH· Jml 
h;v.l noL snubbed me. I he kttc.·1 ,tho -.c,·mcd 10 hrin~ 
some of her pcr-.r,nalil) \\ilh ii. ,omc of h,·1 ,1111111,1 cool 
,-weetne~. and imt<·,ul of tht• im.1~t· of hc.·1 \\hida 111, Ion~ 
ing had c1cat<:d, ,he \\,1, .1g.1in III Ill\ 1hnu~h1, ,.., hc.·r n·.11 
self. Ht•r glanu• '!iecrm·d 10 ,1,I. 101 c 011hd, Ill c.• 111 mt•. I kit 
as if !lhe were ne.ir me .md immuh.1h h I \\J., ,l\\,tH' of 
both ,hame and pridt·. It hc.-lpcd 1111 10 compu·1 m, 101-
menting longing'! and to ,upprr·-. .. Ill\ hm 11111~ dt·,irc,. 
Vncomfortt'tl, but ,11,·n~the1wd, .1111I mmc· i11 c.11111111.md 
o( myi,elf, 1 held Ill\ hc.·ad high. I ob1,m1t·d ,1t<n111111od.11io11 
in a vil,,-ge inn, two hour, lfol\'l'lling dl'llamt· hom the 
town, and tool m~ wmk with me. I .,JI mecli1Jti11g ,l g1c,11 
deal in the ..,h,ldc of .i f,ukd lil.ic-hmh .iml 1hough1 cp1itc 
often about m\ life. How ,trJngc and lom·I> wa, 111\e 
path in liffl and how uncert.1in Ill) dc,tinc1tion' Nn-
108 
where djq I have any roots and a place I could really 
nil home\ I only kept up a iuperficial relation'ihjp with 
my parentJI with polite k'-tl'n. I had even given up my 
occupation in order to Indulge in c.rcating hatardou'i 
fantasies, which did not c.ornplctcl)· i,ati'lfy rne~ l",t:y friends 
did not n·ally understand me. Gertrude \Ill\ the only 
person with whom I could ha,,· had a complete under­
standing ,md a p<•J feet rd:11 iom.hip. And Wah I not juht 
< hao,ing hhadow., and building ca,tlt-, iu the air with the 
.work for which I liv,.-d and whi<h iilu,uld ha,e given 
meani118 10 fll) life;, Could it 1c,tll) ha,c a meaning 
and juhtih• ,md f:tll a per-.on\ lik, thiti building up o! 
~ouncl patttru,; and the C'"'-<.iling pla, with im,tgc.,, which 
al tht" ht•o,t Wiuld lll'lp ,,ther pc,,plc to pa._,, .t plca,;anl 
hour? 
'\;1•,·t•rthele,'!, I ,rnrJ...ed f.ti1 h haul a~ain during that 
,ummu I <omplt:t<·d thl· opC'ra itmardl), c,cn though 
1tu;rc w,1,; ,till rnmh l,1cJ...ing in detail and onl) .t ,;ma,'1 
part of it had been written 0111. ~qm<·ttmc·., it gave me 
gr<'at p1 ,1••1rc ag,tin .md I th<>UAht with pride how Ill) 
work \,,,uld h.1u· power O\l'r pt·npk. how o;ingers and 
mu,iciam. conductor'! and choru"c" would ha,c to act 
in a<nmlJncc with m, wi-.hc,. ,md how thl' opera would 
haH· an dk<t on thml'laml, of people .. \1 other times it 
!lt't'nlt'd <1uit,· <·,11,1ordin:tr) .. 11<l nightmari,h to me that 
all thill power and emotion ,hould arise from the restles, 
drr.nus .rnd imagin.uion of .1 poor loneh man ":hom 
c,·t•qone pitied. :\t other timc!I I lmt rouragc tcW,. and 
fdt that m,· oper,1 would never he pcrfornu•d, that it wa-. 
all unreal and c,.tggt•ratt.J. Bm this feehng was r.trc: 
i11 my heart I was rm.vinn•d of the <111alin and strength 
of tn) worJ.... It was ,imt'Il' aml .intent: it ~ad been 
l<)!t 
experienced and had blood in its veins, and iJ I do not 
want to hear it any more nowad.iys and ;rite quite 
a different kind of music, thet·e is, nevertheless, aJl my 
youth in that opera. Whenevd, I hear melodies from it 
again, it f( 'hh if a mild 1,pring storm drifts across to me 
from the at"mdoned v.iller, of }Outh and pai,sion. And 
when I thin( that all its strength .md power over peoplt• 
was born of weaL.ncs.,, prh ,ltio11 and longing, I no long,·r 
know whether m, whole life ,ll that time, and ,ll\o at 
present, c.in be <Jllcd h,1pp, or 'iJd. 
Summer w.i., ,lppro,uhing it, l0nd1 One d~d-night, 
during a heJ,,. tcmpl'<iluom downpour of r,un. 1 lmi.,Jwd 
writing the owrturc The follo\\in~ mornin~. thl' r.iin 
wa,; r,light and l0<1I, the ,i.., .tll l'H"ll gre,. •\lld the gJrdtn 
had bctome aummn.11. I pJ<l..t·d m, po.,.,t • .,,iom .m<I 
went bac L. to to\\ n. 
Among m, Jc-quJint.imc,, 'J li.,t·r .md hi, ,i.,tt.r \\t'rc.· 
tlte onl} oneh \\ho had ,lhl•,ul) rc.·turnt•d 'J ht·, hoth 
looJ..ed ,en \\l'Il .md ,unhurnt .,flu hum~ .1111,m~ tht· 
mountain'!. The) h.ul h.i<l ,l <,urpri .. ing numhl't of t''\.J>U· 
ientcs on their tom ,mcl H't thl'\ \\<t'H H.n mtrrc.·,tt<l 
and exdted tu J..now huw m, opc.·1.i "·'' ptogH·,.o,ing \\'c 
went through the merturc .md it "·'' quite ,1 J.,'lt'.tt 
uioment for me.· \\hen Tcir,cr put Jnr, h,md on 111, r,houldcr 
and said: "Look, Hiigittl', ht·H· 1r, J ~rt·Jt mmici.m'" 
De11pite all m, H·,m1ing .1ml .n dmn. J .iw,utc·d 
Gcrtrude'r, rerurn \\ith grc.•,tt t.1~<·1t1c.,, ,,., I h,ul .1 IJrgc 
amounr of \\l)rl.. to r,ho\\ h,·r ) L.m·w 1h.1t r,hl' would 
take a ke<·n intctc'>l in it, ,mcl 1mdc.•r.,t,111cl .md ('Jljm it 
all .t.s if it were her 0\\11. \hm< .111. I \\,1., ,m,iom, to 
see Hcinri(h Muoth. \\hor,c.• hdp '"'•" t'\\cntiJl to me Jnd • fro1ri whom I had nl5t heard for months. 
lJO 
Finally\ he arrived, before Gertrude's return, and 
walked ir-.o my room one morning. He looked at me 
searchingly. 
"You look terrible,". hcf 'iaid i.haking hi~ head. "Well, 
when one composes music like that!" 
"Have you ltX>ked al your parti'" 
"Looked at it? I know it b) heart and 'will •ing it as 
soon as you wii-h. It's wonderful music!" 
"Do you really think soi''" 
"I do. You have been doing your finest work. Just 
wait! Your modd-atc.• fame will be a thing of the past 
when you/ opera i'i performed. \\'ell, that"s your affair. 
\Vhen do )OU want me to "ingt There arc one or two 
poi111s that l8wam 10 mention. How far arc you with 
the whole opera:-.. 
' ,bowed him 111} \H>rk. and he I hen took me to his 
rooms. l"herc. for tht· hri-t time I heard him sing the 
part for which I had alwa~s had him in mind duriiag 
the play of rm own emotiom. amt I kit the power of 
my m• 1< md his i-inging. Onl} nuw c.ould I visualise 
the wi.,ult-opera on 1he stage, nnl) now l'onld my own 
flame reach mt• and let me feel it'I warmth. It was as 
if the opera did not hc.-lon~ to me. a-i if it had never been 
1ity work, but tha1 it had its own life and had the effect 
of an external power over 111c. 1-·or the first time I felt 
this scn'le of detachment of a work. from its creator, in 
which I had not pn·,ioush n·alh hclic\"ed. M}··work 
bc.·gan to stand there, mo\"e and show signs o{ hi! while 
I still held ii. and alreadv it was not mine: it was like a 
diild that had grnwn tal;er than its father: it lh·ed and 
acted of its own atcl.rd and l<Klked at !UC ind~ndently 
through its own l")'CS; yet it bore my name arul a resem-
111 
bl.mce to me. I had this dual, almost frightenb1g feeling 
with other works later. 
Muoth had learned the part wery well, and l was easily 
·able to give my agreement •o the slight alterations 
which heiit-sired. He then enquired about the soprano 
part, whicl-..~he onl~-partly knew, ancl wishcc.l 10 know 
whether a sr .. ger had yet tried it. For 1hc first time I 
had to tell him about Gertrude, and 1 managcc.1 to do 
so quietly and l·asually. He knew 1hc• name <1uite well 
although ·he had nc,·cr bcl'n to lmthor's house. He was_ 
surprised to hear that Gertrude hact studit'd the part 
and could sing it. 
"She must have a good H>kc," tw o;aid approvingly, 
"high and swel:l. \\'ill you take m<.· then, some tiuu•?" 
"I inu;ndcd to ask thl·m if you n,ulcl c·om<.· in any rnse. 
1 should like to fl('ar you ,ing wiLh l\lis,; lmthor orKc or 
twice: some corn·ctiuns will be m·c·cssar~. :\s ,;cKm ao; thl· 
Iwthors an· bat·k in town. I will ask them." 
"You're a lud~~ fellow n·all~. Kuhn .. \111) Tc•i,er will 
be able to help you with tht• ordtc'ilr:tlio11. The· opl·ra 
will be a succ:css, \Cna'll s<.·<•." 
I did not say an~ thing. I had as yet no thoughts about . 
the future arid the fate of my op<.·ra: first nf all it mus1 
be finished. But !linre I had heard him sin~ it, I al,o 
belic,·ed in the power of my worl... 
\\'hen I told Teisc·r about it. he i.aicl 1,rrimly: "I «111 
.belic\·e. you. Mundt has trem<.·ndous <·nergy. If only he 
wasn't -1'> supt·rfidal. He n<'wr n·ally <·art'!> about the 
music, only ahcml himself 1-k is a n>mpl<·le <·goist." 
On the day that I went to sc.·e Gc.·rtmde, who had at 
last returned. my heart beat more quickly as I wall..<'d 
through t~ garden of the lmthors' house in its autumnal 
112 
g,ub, w1tt1 the I, ,t\<.\ .tlrt,t<h hu~rnmng 10 fall But \he 
t,unc tow\rd., rn<. ,nulmg, lool..111i; ,t lurk -.unhurnt dnd 
more ht•,wuf 11I Jllcl gr.u <.If ul t hell t., <.r ',he tu Id out ht.r 
h.md to me, ,.mcl 110 eft ..11 ,01<c hu lm~ht qc, dnd her 
whol<· d1,u11uru~ 11.1,111JI m..11111u m1111uh.n<l,;h<.\\1t<hcd 
me ,lilt.\\ I i;l.1dh put JII\ ,orro,\, 111d de.,,, ., ,1'1d<. and 
w,10, h,1pJH to Ill m l11r ,00•!1111~ 111<.\lll<< fo~.un ',he. lt.t 
me• 1,1!..e th(. le. ul t11d 1, I <maid 1101 br1114 111\',{)f to 
mc.11t1011111, ltll<r ..and IIH n 11111< of 11 ,he .11,o ruu,uned 
\Ihnt ,1ho11111 md 111 110 ,,.1, 1111h, lied II\ her hch.i,10ur 
th,ll our fr u 1111,111T, I\ 1, m 111, 1, 1 ,pod1 or m d.1ngu 
')}ll dul m\t II\ 111 1\oHI llll ,IH ,, 1, oftc.n alone \\llh 
nu .• ,1' .,Ju ,, ... , emd111< 111 th.11 I ,,,11ild ,, ,1,ce1 hu \\t,h<.., 
.md nol HP'-•'J 111, dul1r111011 of 'nH u11Ic,, ,h<. cncour 
.ii;c d me \\ 11ho111 ,, 1,1m~ Ill\ LIIIH 1\1 \\Lill throu~h 
,, , or I ol the I 1,1 ft\\ morHh, .111d I told hu th 1 
\tuoth 11, I I 1111 cl Iii, (llf• 111d 1,111,ed 11 I ,t,led hu 
pu1111..-.w11 to h1111~ 111111 tll{11 1, 11 ,, 1, l"<.11t1.1l S..r 
me to ~o 1hro1qh lioth p1111opil puh \\tth thun 
to~c 1he • 1 cl ,he ~ t\ 1 hu ,qll, 1111 111 
I .1111 uot clmrq ,o \\ 1ll111~1\ ,ht , ud \ ou !..no"' 
th.11 I m H r ,m~ 101 ,11 lll't h md hrt111 <. Hunne h 
l\.1uuth 11 \\Ill he d1111hh J> 1111111! 111d not Jmt hu.iu~e 
ht 1-. ,t ( tmou, ,111~e I I hut 1, ,01111 thm~ .1hout hun 
th.11 fr1~htt m mt 11 It 1,1 n the ,t t~t \nH, l\ \H !I 
'tle hem 11 ~m-. 
I ehd 1101 Hlllllll to de le 11d 111d pi 11,c m, Inc nd I did 
not ,,.1111 to nuJ...l hlr ful eHn mort 1.mlnn.1,,e1..1• 1 v.a-. 
cor1,111e e cl th.ll ,tftll tht ln,1 !llllt ,he ,,mild \\Jlhn(\"h 
,111~ \\Ith 1nm .u.~.un "t H 1.1I d,I\, l.tto \111111 J. 111d I \H 111 thut .me! \HTl' 
rt<CJHd ll\ our ho,t \\Ith t,'1e I' poh•u1t,, .m~ ll\tn<. 
I I l 
He had never shown the slightest objection ~ my fre­
quent visits and my friendship with Gertrude Ind would 
have laughed if ,myone had bid anything agahHt it. 
He was less pleased about Muofb coming, but the latter's 
manner W\S very polisht'd ,md wrrcc.t ,md bo1h the 
lnithors we~ agrce.ibl) ,urprii.cd. The foru:ful, airogant 
singer with a bad reput,ltion c.ould beh.tvt• irrcp1oach­
ably. Al:,o he w,t') not ,.iin and dcddt·d in hi, opinion'), 
but modc:,t. 
"Shall we :,ing?" asL.cd Gertrude .thc1 a whik Wt•• 
stood up and went .tun,, to thc mu,1t'room. I ,.tt dcrn,n 
at the piano, s.iid a few word, .tbuut the itft1oduc1ion 
and scene. gc1vc i.ome d1rcc tiom .uul I hc·n .a..L.t•d Gt•11111dt• 
to begin. She did c,o, ,mging ,oil h in ,1 ~-.. u .tim"<I .rncl 
careful mc1nncr. On 1hc othl·r h.md, \\ht·n 11 \\.t., '.\luo1h\ 
turn to i.ing, hl' did ,o .doucl \\llhout he,11.11 icm 111 ,t'II 
comciou .. nN,, c..tpth.11cd u, both .iucl m.iclt· u, t·ntt·r lht· 
i.}'frit o( the mm1< ,u th,11 Gt·1 u udt· 110\\ ,1I'><, ,.mg with 
out rei.traint. !\fuoth, \\ho"•" u,t•cl lo llt·.ttmg l.uhc, of 
good famil) ,en form.1lh, ouh 110\\. p,ucl Jllt·ntiou to 
her, lii.tcncd to ht•r ,111gi11i;-with intt·n·\I .mcl l''-P"-'""'''' 
hi11 admiration in c11<.omc1gml{ but not e,.1g!{er.m·d \1101<1, 
From that time c11l p1t·1ud1tc., ,c1ni,tlt'd, thc· 11m.,1< cl1t0\\ 
ua toi;-ethc1 J.nd m,1dc u, m1glc mmdecl. \11(1 Ill\ \\orl 
that lc1) thc1<" hc1lf de.id in 11npt·rfec.1h ,m11wttt•d pc1th 
continued to c1o;.,ume lhe -,hc1pc of c1 \\. holt· .md In ing 
thing I now L.ncw thc1t the chief pc1tt of Lhc wmL. wc1., 
done, 1Tiat thC'1c ".,., nothing of impm 1.11u ,. th,1t , oultl 
spoil it, and 11 ,ccmcd good 10 me· I dul not conu·c1l m, 
pleai.ure and gratcfull) thankt•d hoth m, fr ieml,. Muo1h 
and l lefr..Jhe hou.,c in a fe\tive mood .tnd he tn•,uc:d mt· 
to ar-unexpt.-c.tcd c.clclJrc1.1ion mcc1l .1l the inn where ht• 
114 
was staying. While we drank ,hampagnc, he did some­
thing tha~ he wa'I a little afraid to do; he addrer,r,ed me 
as an intimate friend aml c.ontinut:d to do "°· Thi~ 
pleased mt• and had my i)ppt m aJ. 
"Here we aH· cnjo}iug our~eht·., .md tclcM'ating," he 
o,aid laughing "aucl I thiuk i1 I', ., ~ood iclc-t"to do it in 
ad\'amt·. 'J h.11 1, th<' b1·,1 1w11· \f1<rw.1r.i, thing., i,eem 
difl("rent. You .1n· goi111.\ to ht· in the limelight, \Oung 
frllow, :uul I hop<· It dot•,n't '>Jl'HI Hill a., it doc., mo'il 
J>e<>pk.'" 
C,crtruck \\,,._ ,.~II ill ,ll <.1,t· ,-.ith !\fuoth for a long 
time. and oJllh \\ 1111<-,in\_\i11g \\ilh him \\d'> ,ht n.1tural and 
umt·,uai11t·d II<" "·" H'J\ pol111· ,rnd comid1·r,ttc, and 
gr.iclualh (,cr,rudl \\,h gl.11I to ,u him ,tnd imitcd him 
t·.i.d1 Ulllt' 111 ., h It ndh l.1,h1011 to c 11111t .,g.1111, ju,t a~ !ihe 
,1: 1 "ith 111< fht·occ,1'>11111'>011 ,...luth tht·thrccofu.,\\ere 
alo11t· to:.o•·lhtr \\lle 1,11e, hut tlu p,uh \\l"Tl then pr,l<­
tiwd arnl d1,1 \l',,ul I lu l111thnr-. h,i.l H·,umed th.&;.ir 
\\ intu g,11 ht·t 111:/., ,.,, 11 h ll :.:1il,11 1111,,11 .. 11 t H'ning, at whit h 
!\luoth ,fr. 11 ,tppt .nul h111 \\llhout rn,1kmg am tontri­
butinn tn thl 111 
.\t tim<·, I 1hough1 1h,ll (,1nrud, ,,.1, bcguming to be 
mon· ll',l'tHd ,-.tth 11H ,11ul th,11 ,hl ,,.1, to '>Orne c,tcnt 
<lr,1wi11~ .,w.n from mt· llmH H 1 1 Jlv..iH rq>ro,t<..hed 
JU\'>l'H for thl'"· thou~hh .md \,,,, .i-.l1.1med of m, .. uspi 
cioni.. G1·1 trudt· \\,1, HI\ mm h 111 dt'r11.rn1l .,., the mi'>tres,; 
ot ,l hmht' wht·a· 111u1h t111c11.1111i11~ ,,,.., clone, and it 
oftln ~.l\t: m<· plt,1',lllt Ill "'l' hl'I llHlH' .1hout ,,tid ,lC't 
a" ho,ll''' .1mor1g,1l111 g.m,i... lool..mg ,o ,nun~. t.h,uming 
and ~r:u mu,. 
I he "ed., p.i.,.,cd ,n H'l\ 1p1111..h f,,1 nw I worked 
at nn op<·r.i., wh1d1 I hopt·d IO hni~h dmmg 11'e winter. 
l l ", 
I h.id meetin~ with Tei&er, and spent m,m~ evening-. 
wuh 1nm and hi'I r,nter rhen there were clll 'H>rt'I of 
lettcn and inc1denh, ar, mv r,ongs \\ere <,ung .it different 
pl.1ce1t, c1nd all the <,tlmg mu11c. I h.ad compmc·d w,11, 
pl.t)ed m 'berlm fherc \\ere enqm1u·, c1nd tll'wo,p,1pe1 
1evie\\'I, ,m\.. r,uddcnh t•,cnone 'lt'emt.d to kno" th,u I 
was \\Orlmg't,.1 .tn opc1c1, ,lltbough .1pc1r1 from Gt•t1aude, 
the Te10,eri. .tnd l\luoth I h,1d not .,,ml .1 word .1huut 11 
to an)one It dul not 1tc1lh m.tttlf, .md mwc1rdh I w,1<, 
happl c1bou1 the,e ,u~m of ,uc.cc,, It .,, emcd .1, ,r .al 
lc1,t, and ,et ,uc,n cnou~h .1 p.ith I.,, opt n htlo1< me 
I had not he< n to m, p,,n•nt, hotN. fm ., '" hol, H..ir 
.rnd I l\l'lll there for C h11,tm.1, \h mothtt \\,h .1tlu 
uonate, but theH ",.., tht• olcl , c,u u ht'l'\( t ll m "hu h 
on Dl) ,1dc \\ ,1, ,l f c. ,11 of be m~ 1111,mulu .,,oocl .111d cm 
her '1de .1 lacl.. of futh mm, c.,ru, .1, , 111mu1111 .md 
d11tbehe( m tlu.. ,u 1011',n<. .,., uf 111, uulc .1, mu., \ht no\\ 
tallcd .uum,llt dh .1hou1 \\ h.n .. tu h.ul lu u d uul H ,ul 
.,bout mt. but mmc.. to l{IH m< pit 1,m, th.111 horn 
con,u.uon. for lll\\,udh ,tu llll'lllll',tul lh<.,c. ,1p1>.1r<.nt 
o,uccco,o,(.', cl'i mmh .1, m, ,II l .1, J \\hol< It \\.l, not th.11 
'lhe clad not hlt 11111<,u mdud .11 om I mu ,ht u,((I to 
<,1ng J ht1lc, but 111 ht I op1111on .1 11111.,,, 1 111 ,, .., .1 pout 
'I01t of po,on \ht h.ul .,l.,n ht .ml -.emu 111 111, mmu 
c1.nd dul not undu .. t.md or < .iu for It 
l\h t.1th<.r h.id mon fc11th \<, 1 me r, h,1111 ht thou~hl 
,1.bo,e .ill of m, mc1tt11c1l .. u«<.,~ .uul .,lthoui;h he h,ui 
,tl\\d\'>~nen me J guurou, .11lm1r mcc.· \\1thou1 ~rumh 
hog, ,1ncl <,met. I h.id ldt I ht· · ore ht "" .i h ul J~.1111 
contmued to -.upporL me fulh, he \\J'I gl,ul to ,u· that I 
wa, bcgmmng 10 cc1.rn monc', .iml that thut• \\t re 
prospeu,/Wf 111,1.kmg c1 Ii, m~ b, m, 0M1 t fforr.. Jl:n mg 
116 
m.adc mon~y himM:lf, he reg.ardc.d th1., cl\ an C\\Cnll.al 
ba.,i., for c1 tl'<1pe<.tr1hk cxi,tc.nc.<" He "cl& rn bed when I 
.u1ned. He h.ul hc1d cl fall on lhc day IJ<.l01e Ill\ clrr1ul 
.md had in1urcd .t foot 
Ht• ~,l'l 111 ,l ,hgh1h plulmopluc.il mood I <,tine. <.lo-,er 
10 bun 1han mu.ii r1nd \\,1, 1111c.H,1c.d III h,. prc1c.U<cll 
ontlooL. on hie I \\cl\ r1hh to tt 11 111111 W1<1m of m, 
uoubll.,, \\h1c.h I had m,tr dom 1m,1ou'>h bc.c.iu\t: of 
cl \Cn,c of b,1,hfulm.,., \01m thllll! \fuoth had one.<. ,,ud 
<4<.uncd lo mt .md I ll pt,lll d 11 10 Ill\ f.itho \luoth 
h,ul ,,ud, not 11,tll• 111 c,11111,t 1h11 Ill 1hou!{ht ,outh 
",1, till' mmL•lhfhc uh tum of Ith .md he fouucl th,11 mo .. 1 
old pc.op!< \\ 1 It mm h more ,Lrc m .mcl c ontultt cl thclu 
}OUII~ pc oplt • \h f 11hu IJu~h, d Jt thJt r1nd ,sc11d 
thoughtfulh • !\Jlt11,1lh \H old pcopk '>cl\ JU'!II the 
or•:• '''t' but 1hu1 1, .,nmc 11111,1 111 \\hll ,0111 tnuul 
,r11d I ll"nJ.. out < lll dr,m rpuh .1 d1,u111 t t11,1,1u11 
lll .. t\\Ull \Ollth .md 111.11111n, ,,,111h uul, \\hen L~Olb~\ 
dot,, m,1ll1r1t, ht1.;111, \\lun om lnt., lm 111hcr" lhJ'"' 
\\h,u I r ,l' t. \ 01111..; I" oplt. h t\l 111 ,n, plt.J,ltrt., J.nd 
m,m, ..cnrim'I, htc,111,t thl\ unh h,1H 111tnh<.hc, to 
thml. uf, ,ntHn \\l'>h u11lpc1\ 110110111"'umc., 11npm 
tJ.nu < H r \ pit 1'UJl 1, I 1~1t d 10 th< I 1111 hut .1h,o l. H~, 
\Olin\\ ,mcl IIIJII\ \\ho h Ill 1h.11 1hur \\l',ht, <J.lllleh ht. 
fulhllul, 1mmuh,llt h put 111 nd to then In e, I h,•t 
1, hun~ ,01111~ I II mmt pu>plt ho\\< H r lht n c oml\ 
c1 tmu \\htn tlu ,11u.1111111 thni..;t, ,,ht11 tht, ll\c mou.. 
for othu, 1101 £01 .111, ,11111011, ll,ho11, hut qmtc. .~uu 
alh \ tJ1111h 1, tlu n ,1"on "uh mmt ptnph. Ont. 
thml, It·.,., .1hmn om ,t lf .mcl om ., "1,ht·, \\ ht n ont hcl'!I 
c1 f,muh Othu, lmt tlun t.~ou,111 111 1 lt''>pom1hle 
po\ltaon. m pohno, m J.11 01 111 ,t ll nu \ uunt pt.oplc 
ll'. 
want to pla); mature people want to work. 1-man does 
not marry ju11t to h.1ve children, but 1f he doe11 have 
them, they thange him, and fmalJy he 11en th.tt every­
thing ha11 happcnl"d j1nt for 1hcm l h.1t hnl..., up with 
the fJ.c.t lh,1t )OUllF, peoplt· lil..t• to t,111.. .,bout dc..1th but 
do not rt.\lh thml.. .1bout H It 1., 111,t the othc1 w.1v 
1ound wuh"\ Id people l ifc <,eem., long to \oung people 
.tnd they <.dll theretmc tome. ntr.itt ,111 then w1\hc11 .ind 
thoughb on thcrw,t h C'!I Old pc.•oplt ,ire. t 011\ltous of .m 
approadung end, .md thJt eHr\lhmg th,tt one h.i., .m,:1 
doe11 for one11eU hn.ilh £.ill, 11h01 t .11uPl.1c.l.., \.1luc.· I herc­
fore. a 111,111 r eqmrt, f.iuh .1ml ,ometh11~ t"l,c th,u 
contmuc.,, he. dot, not \\ml.. Jll"t for the \\orm, 'M> du•rc.· 
arc: wife ,llld duld, h1Nnt,, mcl 1e,p<mitJlnh1, .111d the 
n.iuon to 1u,t1f) thed.11h 1011 ,111d 11101I In th.it rt,pc.<t 
l<>ur friend i., ,1mt<. ru~Ju, ., 111.111 .., J1,1pp1e1 whc. n he 
lhes fm othe,., th.111 \\hua ht 1m1 hH, for hnmdf, hut 
~rl people !lhould not m.11..t \Uc.la ., ,ntut nt ll, bu.1mc 
It i•m't one re.,alh lu ,m, c,10,e, th< mmt ll\t h ,oun~ 
people become the bc,t old peopl<. not thm< \\hn prctcud 
to be J.i. WN~ •" ~1.mdf,uhu, \\lulc. thu J.r<· 11ull .it 
'l<hool" 
I remained ,ll home. for ,1 ,u.c.l.. ,rnd ,.ll ,1 1-,'TC J.t dt.11 
at my father\ ht·d,1dc. He. \\cl., 1101 ., p,1t1cnt 11n.1hd. 
6eiirdes, c1pc1rt from tht• ,m.1ll t111un to Im fnor he. "•" 
in o.ccllcnt hc,tlth I told huu 1 "•" ,011, th,11 I h,td not 
11ho\\ n more c.onfulc. nc t' .nul eh ,l\\ n do..,_r to Jmn p1 e 
"1ouffl, but ht 1em.1rl..cd th,ll th.11 c.ould ht .,,ml for hoth 
~•de.,, and our rc.l.t.t1ou-.l11p m thc.•,tuturc \\ould ht bc..ttc.r 
than 1f we had 111.1dc. prun,uurc. attempt-., \\lnc..h r,uch 
\uccecd, to undcr-,tand each otht·t In c1 d1M re< t ,md 
kind wa~ he ,1r,l..cd me .tbout m, J.tlllmlc tow.ircl11 women 
118 
I did not w,mt to ,c1y .1.nvrlung about Gertrude; what I 
did tell him wa, very bncf 
"Don'I worry," ':laid ·111~ father ,nuling, ">ou are the 
type to make .i re.tit} good hu.,h,md, mtclhgent women 
will '10011 notic.e thJI Onl> be. Wolf} of women of o;mc1ll 
mc.tn, who mc1, be Jftcr 1,our mom, And 1f vou do not 
hnd the one th,tt \ou, mi-..tg< .1.11d thmk HAi \\ould hke-, 
it • ., .. ull 1101 dhc.1,1rou., Lene btt\\t'<.n ,oung people 
.mcl love ,tftc.r mc.1111, ,c..th of mJrn,tg<. I'> not rhe o;ame 
tJ11 ng \\ h<11 on, 1' , ou nA, one h t., rmh one.,e}f to thmk 
of ,md ,.uc. for, h111•\\h<.n thu<. 1., J home.hold, th<.rc. c1re 
orh< r th111~,•10 .tlll 11d to I h 11 1, ho\\ It \\cl'> \\Ith me. a-. 
'tOLl \\tll l..110\\ I.,.,,,., HI\ much m 10\c. v.1th ,our 
morhu 11 "••·• ,t ll 1I loH m ud1 But 11 onh l,1,1,d a 
\t,tr 01 t\\o, then 11111 JM~'t1011 rhul do\\11 .md \\3'> cllmmt 
,r, 1 uul \\<. h,trdh k11t" ,du 1<.0\\t ,tnod m rd.1uon to 
c.uh otl1u I illn tht d11ldn11 ( tlllt ,om l\\O dder 
,1,1u, \\ho d1«I \dun the, \Hll ,oun-4 ,md .,.,, had tlM!911 
to look .1f1e1 Om dtm,uul, on t UIJ other \\Cre c.on,t• 
«1u<11th ,<.., th<. u,olm,., hct\\Hll u tclme to ,m end, 
.uul .,uddtnh Im, \\,1, rho<. .1~.1111 to bt mn·. It wa,; not 
the old Jou.-, but ,mm thlll!.\ q1111e n<.\\ 1 lw, hJ't rem.u~d 
<.'\er '>lll<e ,u1hou1 rnuh11!), mmh Tt\J\lll!.\ fm more thcln 
th1rt\ H,n, .:\ot .111 Im<. lllJtd1" turn out cl~ \\ell, 
md<•t.<l. H 1, le\\ do 
I o ml' ,111 tht,( ob,tn.111011' \ll\l.'cl no purpose. but 
the nc\\ ,onh,il 1d,1t10n,l11p \\llh m, fclthc-r en<.our.ig-ed • mt ,nul 111.ult lilt ,l!,\Jlll 1.111m m, hmm tcmar<l., \\hl{h 
I h,td felt nuhtfc.tl 111 durmg- th<. p1<,1 fc.w \CJ.I, \\ he-n 
I depclrtcd, I dul not fl'!.\• l't the , 1,11 and deoded to 
l..et·p 111 more f1c.<1m 111 <.olltJ<.t \\Ith th, old ~ople m 
future 
119 
Work and travelling for the performances of.my string­
music prevented me from visiting the Imthon for a 
while. When I went there again, I found that Muoth, 
· who had previously only goneathere in my company, was 
now amongst the most frequently in\'ited guests. Mr. 
lmthor still treated him moll~· and rather distantly. but 
Gertrude sct"focd 10 ha\'e bt•come good fril·nds with him. 
I was glad about that. I saw no grounds for jealousy 
and was convinct·d that two people who wen· as dissimilar 
as Muoth and Gertrude would i11t(·n·st arnl ;1t1rat·t ea<"h 
other, but could not Jon· and makt~' (·ad1 other happy. 
So I was nor :u all s11spidn11!> wheu h(• ,;:mg '·ith ~1er and 
their beautiful \'oin·!> miuglcd. Thn looked at1rac1ive 
together; the\" were both t.tll aud wdl-fonrt•d, ht·. morose 
and serious, ~he, bright and 'il'fl'lll'. Rl'et·nth-, however, 
it seemed to mt· that !ll'tc found sc1111e diffi, uh\' in main­
taining her old innatt• screuit,·. and she i.cnm·timcs st•C'med 
tit•d and distractt.-d. Quite oftt·n she looked at Ill(' seriously 
and searchingly, with C'uriosity and i111t·n•,;1. in the way 
that worried and depressed pcopk look ,ll t·:u h other, 
and wht•n I smiled ar her and r<'sponcl(•cl wi1h a friendly 
look, her features rclax<"d into a ,;mile so ,;Jowly an<l in 
such a forced manner. that I wa-. disturhcd. 
Vet it was quite rare that I nntin·d this: at other 
times Gertrude looked as cheerful and radiant as ever, 
so that I attributed the!ie observation,; 10 ima~ination or 
a passing indi~position. Only onn· wall I rt·alh shodcd. 
Whi~ one of her guests wa'I playing scm1c UeC"tho\'en 
music, she lcarwd back in the o;~mi-darknc~s. prohahly 
thinking that i.he was quire unobserved. Earlic:r, while 
receiving her gm·srs in rht· full light. she had appeared 
bright a';;d c·hccrful, but now, wirhdrawn into herself 
12() 
and clearly unmoved by the mu-,k, h<"r face relaxed and 
assum<"d an cxpn·,,ion:of wcarinc.,.,, anxiety and fear, 
like that of an cxa.,pcrJ.tc:d <.hild. It Ja.,ted r,evcra] min­
utcs, and when I ,a\\ it; 1' wa, '>I Utml·d. Something war, 
troubling hc:1. Th,tl alcm<· """ had, but it worric<l me 
that :-.he '>hould p1e1ernl lo he clwcrful and con<.cal 
eH·r;thing from me .. \., -.0011 ... ., th<· rnu,ic ~\'a'> hni,;hcd, 
I we111 up to h<·r, ,at dcm II he,ick her and began a 
<a,u.tl <or1H-r,atio11. I ,aid 1ha1 ,he· hJd hJd a buw 
~in1c·r and I hJ.t I ~.1d .1l.,o h,HI .1 11, ing I imc, lnll m} 
remark'> wen· 111,ul<· in li~h• ,rnd h.11f jt .. 1ing tm1e ... Finall~. 
I mentioned' 1h,ll J><'tiod i11 lh<' .,p,in~ '"'hen we had 
di'I< u,;,cd tlw hc·11,in11in~, of Ill\ opc·1,1 .rnd h,Hl plaved 
and 'Id.Ilg I he111•1ogc·1 ht 1 
She thl'll ,.1id: "Ye·,. tlHh<' \H'fl' hJpJn time<,." \he 
,.,HI 111J mote· th,111 1h.11. bur it '"'•'' .1 conft·-,,ion, for 'lhe 
,aicl i I n. t h gr e,ll c·,11 m ,t Ill'""· I n·.1d i II it hope for 
m,o(c•lf ancl i11 111, h<·,111 I \\,1, th.mltul 
11011!,{ed tn u·pc-.,r 1h1· qul'-.tion I h:.td .,.,l..ed her dmin~ 
the MlDIIIH"r. I Ju lit·H d ,,11h .111 du<" mode-.t, that I 
could H'l\lurc to i111l·rptl'I the ch.rngt· in her manner, 
1hc• <·mh.ir,1,-.mt·111 ancl umt-rt.tin fr,u., nhid1 .,be r<',e,-1 
,tl -tilllt''> .. 1 .. f.1, om .1hlt-,igm for me. I found iL touching 
lo ,t·<· ho\\ lll'r ~11 ll'lh pride• '>Cemc·d \\oundcd and h.1rd 
to di,~ui,t·. I did 1101 11.nt· ,.1, amthin~: her unccr1.1inty 
hurt mt' and I kit I 01n.~l11 10 kl'l'J> m, un,pokt•n promise. 
I han• ncH·r known hm, to hdt,l\l' \\ith \\omen. I ,,1.ule 
tht· ,;,1mt· mi,t,11..t· .1, Ht·imic h '.\fuoth, the other wav 
round: I tn:,llt·cl women .i.. if the, were friendll. 
A!i I t·H·nru.1lh could 1101 <on .. idt·r m,· ob~enations to 
he jmt illu-.iom ,me.I \l't onh h.1lf mulct ~tocxl G.r-trude'!' 
changed manner, I ht•c,1mc r,.llht·r re.,ened, ,·i.,ited her 
UI 
less frequently .md avoided intimate c.onvcrsation-. with 
her. I w,mted to "how hf't c.ons•derauon and not make 
her more sh, ,md fearful as she \Cemed to be 11uft'cring 
and in a ,tale of confti, l I thtnk she notic<'d the d1angl' 
in m, beh,ni<>ur .md did not <1<'<'111 cti .. plc.1.,Nl th,u I 
should L.ccp W) dM.111<.e I hopc.•d rh.u ,u• <1J10uld .,g.1111 
ha,e ., <Jlllt'I. p<,1<t.ful unw .,ftcr till \\11lt<.r ,md 'tlu-
11nenuou, t 111c1 t,u11111~. ,md I ".mretl to \\,lit until th< 11 
But I "•"' nftt.n HI\ ,ou, fm ht•r, ,uul Al .1du,1II) I .,1,o 
felt di.,turh<'d .ind thou~ht there t'm,t be. ,omcrht~ 
IICl'iOU\ J>f'UdlllR 
I wa., reo,tk" und,•1 the tcm10n of rlu. <n<um .. t.a.n<C.''I 
Febru.in .irr1,c..d .ind I ht.~.m to 1011~ tor ,pt IIIA \funth 
had not been to ,u• me HI\ mmh II• h.ul, mdud, 
h.id J 11trcnuom ,, mtu ,u tht Opu ., lfnu-.e ,md h,ul 
rctcnth 1ctt.1Hd l\\o m1p011.1111 ofltr-. from \\tllJ...1111\\11 
the.1trc11. ,about "hu.h lu h,ul 111 111 1L.c ,1 clu , .. um lit• 
di1f• alOl 'll.l.lTI to h,t\l .mothll I.uh f11c. nd ,ii I< ,i-.t, ,m<c.• 
tht' htcaJ... ,urh I.01t1t I h.1d nor ,c c n .111, orhu \\om,m 
ell h1, hou\C. \\c lr.id rccu11h <clc.hr.11cd lu, hnrhcl.n 
Sin<.e th< 11 I h,ul not "'t n tum 
,l. no\\ felt ,m ml{<. to t.tn .md \<l l11111 I "•'" hc.~mmn~ 
to fee) the. "tr,un of m, < h.m~< d re l.111nn,h1p "11h 
~crtrudt•, o\tr \\t•rL. .111cl tht l011~ \\llllll .md I lnol..c.cl 
him up to h,lH ,l < h.it \\ 1th }11111 I ft ~,I\< me. J ~,., .... or 
c,hen, and r.,JJ..ul lU mt• ,,hout rl1t th< 1t1t lk ,eumd 
tired .ind dl\lr,u 1«1 ,md uml\11,ilh g< 111lt I h,tt nul 10 
hm1,1ooJ..«I .irouncl tlu 100m ,md "•'" 111,1 ~omg 10 ,..,1,,. 
him "hrthcr he hc1d hun In tl1t"lmthm, .,g,nn, \\htn I 
c1cddcntc1lh \J\\ .111 cnH lope.• w11h (,c.rll ud< ., h,1111l"11tllll{ 
on u h"1g m1 the r.ihlc. Hdmc I cuulcl H,tlh 1.1J...c II m. 
a fcelmg of horror .ind b1ttunco,., "died up in me ll 
IU 
<.ould h,lH' h<·en dll IO\ll.tllon, .t o,unpl<• fo1tndhtv, yet I 
<.ould not h< hcve II ho~vu much I mtd 
I w,l'i .thlt• to <ompme m,,.< If ,rnd left o,oon dfterwar<h 
Almoo,t unw1llmgh, I n.tlhc.d thc11 I kntw eventhmg 
It could h.tH htu1 111 rn,11.111011 d llt\tdht,, ,;ometlung 
<iu1tt• < ,1,u,11 -\l t l knc.\\ r h.i.t It \\ 1, not ~uddenh, I 
dc.•,trh undC'J\tnod L H n thm~ 1 lt.i.t lud hc1ppL-md rec-c.nth 
I l,,.m w I h.ul undo t,1!..<.11 ro \\ 111 c111d 111..tk< o,ure, but dll 
m, tho11~h1, 111 th1' connufton h,1d Jmt hun pre.text,; 
,111.d n.< mL, I he ·''-' 0\\ 111d ptlr< ul du ph c111d fe~tc.red 
111 111, hlnocl \\ he 11 I r<.1d1cd hmm md ,.11 111 m, room, ' ITI", <rntfuo,um \\,1' .,10,\h npl111<I I)\ 1 fu.lm~ of J.lmo<,t 
tunhl< c.ilnuu .. ., ,dnch fmilh p1u,ul11.I .uul l1lnt\\ 
th.tt 111, hft h.1ft 111 t 11 .,h,111trul 111d f,mh .md hope had 
been de-.u °' L d 
I 01 \l\<'r,1I d '" I could tJ• 11h<r ,hrct '1 t<.tr nor feel 
,111", ~nd \\ 11hn111 th111l..111~ 11 m I I h ul d1c1ct«l not 
to 1-(o 011 ll\111~ l11 11n < 1,1 tl11 \\tll 1, liH h.i.d .tfflt 
dom.cl JIil .111cl v11,1trl ro h,t\t ,ft.,1ppt 111d I rhou~ht 
.thout C.:,1111-{ .1, 1 p1u1 of \\111J... 1h11 h.i.d 10 bL done. 
unhC',1t,1t111~h. \\llhou th111J...111g ,,tu thu 11 \\,h pka,ant 
or not 
,\mnng,t tht 1h111~, ,,huh I" u11ul !!I clo befo1thand 
"·" hr,t of di 111 go 111d \hit C,u•ruck to l ceuam 
<.,t(nt fm tht ,,11..t of rndu to rut t\l tht nt<e.,o;an 
< 011hr m,tt mn of m, ,u,pu 1011', I L11uhl h,t,c had tin, 
from '1110111 hut .,lthou~h hL 1ppt nu! tci he le\, to 
bl,unt th,m ( ,t ttrudt ] t r lllld 1101 h1111~ 111, ,df to go to 
h1111 I \\en• to 'lt'l C.,ertnuk hut did nnt hnct her Ill I 
\\ent .1g,un tht folhmm~ d,I\ and l,tU,ul tn her and 
ht·r father fm ,l ft\\ m111utt, u1111I 1hc. l.tttu left Wl> alone 
togcthc.r, thmlm~ \H \\1,lud to ptol<tl..e ~omc munc 
1.n 
She then stood alont' hdorc me and I looked at her 
curiously. She i.ecmcd a little clAmgcd but no Jes,; beauti­
ful than ever. 
"Forgive me, Gertrude." r 'i.iid firmh. "if I trouhle 
,ou once more. I wrol<' ,ou a letter Jming the lltttmmt·r 
~0t1ld I now ha,e an .m,wt.•r to ii? I h.1ve to go on .1 
JOurne,. pe:hap" for a Ion~ time, o: ht'r\\i'it' I 'ihoulcl 
have waited until ,ou ,ou..,clf ... " 
As 'ihe went p,1lt· anti looL.t•tl ,ll me.· in ,urpt i,e. I 
helped her .ind ,poke ··~·•in: "Your. ,lll'i\\C.'I i, '110·. illtn'1 
it? I thcmAht lltO. I onh \\,lilted to br «'H.lin." 
She noddc.·d ,adh. 
"ls1it lkinuch~" I .,,L.cd 
Sht' notltlt·cl ,1~.1in, .ind ,udclc.·nh ,lw ,C't nlt'cl h i~h u·m·d 
and ..ei,cd m, hand. 
"Pll'J'it.' forghe me· .mcl don't do .11nthin~ 10 him" 
"I don't intt·nd tu. ,ou <Jll rt'"' .1,,urul" I ,.ml .mcl 
h'!M· to .,,mle. for I rhuu~ht of !\1,01.111 .uul I.ottic·. who 
bad .ilo,o bt·en 'iO .tll,1< hc.·cl to 111111 .111<1 "}10111 ht· h,uf 
bc.tt<'n. Pe1h.1p., hr \\0111<1 .,1,o lu,ll (,c.·111mh .11ul dt· .. um 
her loft, pticlt· .md 11u .. 1im,.: 11.1turt 
"Geruudc." I hc.·~.111 ,t'!,tlll, "1hi11I.. 11 oH·t' !\ot fm 
m, ,akt· I I.now now ho\\ rhi111~, .,,,uul \\ith me Hm 
Muoth will 1101 m.,l..c• ,uu h.,pp, (,oodln,. Gt·ttrud,•" 
l\h fcelm~ of hdng hcnumhrd .uul 111111.11 ur .,lh c .,Im 
pcni .. tcd. Onh now, \\ht·n Geruml, 1,,11,t·d 10 me liJ..c.· 
that.Jn the '>Jrnc.· tom·., 1h,1t I a·, .1llt·tl I 011it· ming. ,md 
looked at me .,o a11'doml) .ind ., .. ,~1 · "llon't ~o lilt• th,11 
I don't dc•o,crve th.it from ,ou' •·. dul I kd ,.., if m, 
heart wa\ brt'al..ing .iml I h.uf chf11< uln in controllin~ 
m}'~lf. 
I :,eld out Ill\ hand to her dn<I o,Jicl: "I don't w.int to 
124 
hurl either you or Heinrich. But wait a liule. Don't 
lcr him excrdM: hi., poler mer )OU. He dei.troys every­
one be ii. fond of." 
She shook her head a·mt u·ll·a<sed my hand. 
"Good-hvc ! " ,he i.aid <f Uit•tlv, '"it j,, nor Ill) faulr. 
Think kincllv of mt· ,rnd c1ho of Ht·inrid1." 
It wa, o\t·r. I \\tilt hom<· ,mcl prou·cd,·d1,·ith m) plan 
as if it w<.·r«· a pi<·u· of worl., to be dom·. It wai. um· that 
whilt• I did thi, 111, hc,trt wa, hea,, and ftllcd to the 
lfrim with ,orrcw, •• tmt I wa .. .iwan· of it in a remote 
way and It.id 110 '>pc11e thrnu;hto, for it. It ,u., all the 
i.amc· to 111<.· "hcth,·r tht· cl,t\'i and hour., that were left 
went wdl or not. J put i11 ordc1 tht· pil<.· of <sh~l<; on 
whid1 Ill\ haU•fmi.,hed opua w,,., ,Hittcn, and wrote a 
letter to Tt·i,cr to 11,0 with it "<> that 111~ worl.. !ihould, 
i! 1,,.i.ihle. h,· pu·,t·IH<I. l!u11•1 ,c:riomh «>midered 
the nt.111•1• r in whu h I ,hould dit·. I \\i,hcd to '>p.ire mv 
p.in·nt,, h111 , ould thinl of 111, 111.11111<1 of chin~•at 
would mal..t· thi, po.,,il,ll. h1 th1o. Jcmg nm, it did not 
111.tttt·r ~.c> 111m h I h11.1lh dt·t idt·cl t.1 u,t· .1 n·,oh t•r. AU 
tht·.,t· <111t•,tion, cKc unt·d to mt 1111h in J ,hadmn .inJ 
unrt·al {J.,hion. I h.ul nnh ouc 11'\t d idt·,t .md th,ll , 
th.11 I c ou)d 1101 go on li\im~. fm bthind the ril{idin of 
m, tit"< i,io11. J h.ul .1ht·,1,h h.ul .1 ~lim1N· of the horror 
of tlu· lift-th.11 \\011ld umf11mt me It ~atcd .tt lllC' 
hitlt•ou,h t h10111ah , ,lt.llH t'\l, .md it -.ccmcd much Jl}ore 
ugh .111d tt•Hihm!!, th.m 1tu d.nl.. .md ~luum\ <.once12tion 
of dt·,llh. 
111 tlu· ,1h,·111oon. n,o tl.,, .. l.1tt•r, I "·'' rud~ with m~ 
prq,.1ration-.. I '>till \\,llltt·d to h.i,e a \\.111.. through the 
town I h.td lO tal..t· ,l tnupk of houl..,; b.ul.. to th,_libran. 
11 \\.1., .1 unnfmt to me to know that in the e,ening I 
would no longer be alive. I felt ~ilr.e a man who has had 
an accident, who is still part1i under the anae111betic 
and does not feel the pain. but has a suspidon of excru­
ciating torture. He only ho1-es that he will sink. into 
complete oblivion before tht• o;uo;perrc<l pclin be<ome,; 
real. That is how I fdt. I ,uffercd less from an a< tual 
"Pain as fronl an agoni,ing fe.1r lhat I might return to 
consciousne!lll and h.i,·c 10 t•mpt, the wholt• gl.11,; 1hat 
death. which r.llled me. W.l!t to t,1L.e .1wa, from mt•. ·1 hat 
wa'I why I hurried OH'r my w.ilk, JtJtndt•d to whar Wi'I 
nec.euar) and went ,u·.1ight h,u k. l m,uk· JUo,t .i !thort 
detour in order 1101 to go pa-.1 Ger1rudc\' hoU',t' for I 
felt, l(ithout being .able to ,m,1h,c it, th.1t ii I ,.1w the 
hou!-e, the intolerable pJin hom "hid• I ".1, !tt•eking 
escape would OH'rwhdm .md prmtr,11<· mt•. 
So, breathing ,l 11igh c\£ rc•licl, I wt·n1 h.ic L. to lht' hou,;<• 
in whit h I li\·cd. opt·nrcl tht• g,tte ,me! wc•nt immc·cfiau·h 
up-•~:,e ,tair,, kding lightt·r of tu·.m If the grit'f WJ.'i 
still pursuing me .and ,trctd1ing nut it-. c l,1v., tow,mls 
me, if somewhen· within me the £11~htful p.iin ,lumlcl 
begin to gnaw ag.iin. there wt•rt• mah ,1 frw ,tair-. .md 
.. ~:-,•1nd,; bt'lwt•en me .ind liher,1tion. 
A man in uniform <J.llll' down rhc· -.t.iir, towJrd,; mt·. 
Lmm,ed a,ide cln<I h.i-.t<"ned 10 pa,., him, frJring I rnigh1 
be stopped. He then tou<.hcd h1., tJP .ancl pronounu·d m, 
name. 1 looled at him in ch,111,1,. l\cing .uldn· .... t·d and 
stopped, which I h.id fc.iu·d, , ,m-,cd mt· to tn·mhlt-. 
SudcTenlf, a feeling of exhau,tion cwerpnwt•red me. I 
felt that I wa11 going to fall and thl•rc would bt· no hope 
of making the few nect•,;,;an pact"-. to rcad1 m) room. 
Meaf\:'hile, I ,;tared in di,;tres,; at the ,11.1.ngcr. A,; tht• 
feeli'lg of weak.m.~s grew, I sat down on one of the 
u6 
stairs. Tht· man ask<'fl me if I wa., ill and J shook 
my head. lie was hold'1g something in his hand which 
he wanted lo give me and which I would not take, until 
he almost fon-('d it into r■r hand. I made a gesture of 
rcfu,;al and said: ·•1 don't want it." 
He call<·cl for the 1.mdl;uh hut c;hc-w,,., 1101 there. He 
thcr, took me I)\ th<" .11111 m order to lll'li' me up. Ai; 
.. 0011 a,; I ,aw th,1t th<·r<" \\;I', no e,capc and that he 
would not ka\1· Ill<' alorl<'. I ,uclcknh pulled m)·self 
t~gNher. I ,toml 11,1 and \\:tll.1·d toward:, m, room, and 
he follow1;d 1111· • h I frlt t },,11 lie lool.<·,l at me c;mpi­
dou,;h-, I po111tC"d 0111 Ill\ :ujmc·cl k~ and pretended it 
\\.t'i hurting me·. and he· l,c·li1·H·d me. I tool oftt my 
pun,· and ~.tvehim .1 coin He· thanlc·d me and finallv 
pmlwd tht· thing into m, h.111d th.u I J.ad nor wantt·d 
• , 1, l..c. It \\,l'> a rdt·~r .un 
'\'1•anh. I ,rood rliinl.ing II\ th, 1,thlt 1.ionwone had 
now ,toppt·d m< ,md In ol.t·JJ t ht· ,pell "'hat W'~t? 
A tl'l<·1.,rr.u11. 1·10111 \\hom: It \\,l'i ,111 tin ,,tnH' to me. 
It \\:t'> ;:ri1.,1i11g to J<'!l'iH· ,t tt"lcgr.1111 ju~t nm,. I harf 
made .tll 111\ pnp.1r.11i011' .111d .11 tht l.i-t mm11ent ,c,mc 
om• ,l·mf.., mt .1 tl'lt !!_1,1111 I looJ..t·cl ,11 onnd. A letter .A.. 
on the· tahlt·. 
I put tlw lt-1111 in Ill\ pocl.cr: it did not tempt me. 
Hut I ,\.t'> inn i:_:11l'd f., tht It ,t't..'T,tlll I tt111ld 11ot g<·t it 
out of 111, th11111.,d1h .111d it di,tmhed mt·. I ,at clown _and 
lool.t·d ,II it hing 1111 tht 1,d1l1· an,1 \HllHlt•rcd wh~hcr 
to n·ad it or 11111 (1 w.,,. of com,e. ,Ill ,llta<l on m,· 
ft ct·dom: of t h.11 I lt.1d 110 dou ht. ',omeom· w .mted to 
tn .rnd <,top mt·. IH !.!_rml~t•tl mt· 111, flight. w.mted me to 
au<"pt 111, c;orrow ,md 1,1,1<· it to the fua "ithou..t hcin~ 
!ipan·cl .m, twinge. ,t.1b or ,;pa,;m of pain. 
Why the tcleRram (auscd nu.•.so much anxil'l), I do 
not know. I sat bv tlac.· 1ahle fori Jong-tim<' and diJ not 
dare 10 open it, feeling that it «-oncc,11<.-d somc power that 
would draw me bad. and compd me• to bc•.ir the unh<-ar 
able from whith I wanu•d I<• t....r .1pt.·. Whcn I finally did 
open it. ID) h,md i-hooL. I wuld unh clt·dpht•r the 
telegram slo"h a!I it I wt•a· tr,1ml.11i11g tht• contt•nh from 
:111 unfamiliar fordgn l.111~11.,~t·. II u·.id: "l•atfwr ,hing. 
Ple.i,e l·ome JI omt· . .Mo1hc•1." 
I gr,uiu.1l h rcali,t·d \\ h,ll it llll',1111 • Onh H'-.lc·rd,l\ •I • h.iel 1hough1 ahou1 rm p.11t·111, ancl u·1,u:1u·II 1h,1t I 
~hould h.ne to giw thc·m ,,.1111, .and \t"I it ff,ul onh be•c•n 
a -.upt•rfl< i.11 con,ich r .11io11 :\o\\ 1 he·, nt·,uc·d oh,1,1dc.•i., 
dr.iggcd mt· h,1cL. .md m.uk e l.1i111-, upon,mc·. I immt·cli­
aleh rhought ot 1hc tomcr,.11iu11, I h.id h.icl \\ith m, 
father at C:hri,1111.1,. 'Yc11111g pt·oplc·. lw h.ul ,.iid, with 
their cgoti-.m ,nul ft-din~ of indc·pe·mh·ru e·. , .111 he 
brt..:..,ht to tht• point of l'ruling lhc i1 liH·, on ,1uou111 of 
an uufulhllt·d "i,h. hut \,hc·n one\ hll-h hnuncf up \\llh 
thmc of other-,, one.· dm·, 1101 < 011,ade·r um·\ '"' n de -,iu·, 
to the ~amc l'Xtl'nt \nd 1 "·'' .11 .. n tit·cl h, ,m h .1 l10nd 1 
.M,r,,fathcr \\,l'I chin~ !\h mollw1 \\,l'I ,1lorw \\llh tum 
and callcrl me. The· 1ho11~ht of hi, lhing .11HI fwr lll'l"cl 
r,,r me did nor ,It tht· IIIOllll"lll .1fle0Ll Ill(' ',I) tll"q>h I 
thought I L.nc\\ of <'\en ~u•,11u Arid,. hu1 I lulh u•,,li"l·d 
that I could 1101 no\\ ght• lht•m .an t"\.11,l lnnclc-11 IO he•,tr, 
ignore: m ', mother ·., n·c l m·.,. ,md r u n ., " ,l\ from I hc·m 
1.t the c,cning, I \\.1, at the r.ailw,1, 1r,11inn n•ath for 
my jourm•v, and .iutomall< .ilh H:t < omdou,h <lid wh,1t 
wa1 nece~ar}. I obtained 111, tid.et. put the-, h.i11ge in 
my poclet, went on to thl' platform .mcl entt•red the· 
trail,. I sat in a cor1wr of J ,nrnp.irtment, prepared for a 
128 
long night journey. A young man entered the compart• 
ment, looked around. gr#eted me and sat down opposite 
me. He asked me somefhing, but I jmt looked at him, 
only wishing that he would leave me alone. He coughed 
and stood up, picked up hi-, yellow leather travelling 
bag and looked for ano1hrr seat. 
The train travelJed through the night in bt"nd, 1enseles, 
haste, as if something wa1 going to be mi'lsed, or saved. 
Some houn later wl1en I put UJ} hdnd in my pocket, I felt 
the letter. That i-. o,till there, I thought, and I opened it. 
My puh!i'lhcr h;d writtm to me about concerts and 
fees, and ht' i.efornwd me that m\ ,tffairo, were going wrll 
and improving A well-known critic had written .1bout 
me and he COUif:llulated me on 1t. Enc.losed with the 
letter wa'I a newspaper-cutting, an article with mv name 
1, ,11.: lwading. and a long di'1cou't11e on the po!)ition of 
present ,, , · mmi< and oE \\'agn<'r and Brahms; then 
thote wa, a rc\'icw of mv strim~ mmic. 'lnd songs, ~h 
high praio;e ,md ~ood wi-,he'l .. \r, I rt'ad the 'lmall black 
letter,, g .. tdualh realio,ed th,n it was about me, that 
the wo11d and fame were holding out thdr hand, to me 
For a moment I had to laugh. 
fh<' l<'tter and the articlt' had loosened the bandage 
from nt) eH''i, and unexpec tedh I looked back into the 
world and 'law that I \\d'I nm bt'aten and finished, but 
that I wa, in the middle of it and belonged to it. I had 
to go on lhing as \H·II ,,., I lould \\ .l'I it po,o;iblc? T9en 
C\-er~ thing et bout the pc1,t h, r da\S <.,une b.icl to me 
and all that I had klt a• if in a 1;tupor, and from which 
I had hoped to e'ICapc-it wa'I all horrible, bitter and 
humiliating. It \\-as all .i death-sentence. I h~ not 
executed it, and I mu1;t lea,·e my task undone. 
E 
I heard the train rattling alon,. I opened the.window, 
and aa we flew past I saw the gl,'IIDy stretches of country, 
dismal-looking bare trees witli black branches, large 
farm-houses and distant hills .• They all seemed unwilling 
to exist, to express sorrow and resentment. Some people 
might think all this was beautiful, but to me it only 
seemed sad.,.J recalled the song: "ls that God's will?" 
However muc.h I tried to look at the trees and fields 
and roofs outside, however earnestly I tried to concentrate 
my thoughti. on remote subjects and on anything I cou.t.d 
think of without distr~s, I was unable to do so for long. 
I could not even think about my father; M had ~ecome 
remo::e with the trees and the countryside at night, and 
against my will and despite my effort.,, my thoughts 
drifted ba<.k to forbidden things. I saw a garden with 
old trees in it, and ·,inongst them was a house with 
palm-trees at the entrance, and inside on all the walls 
th~. were old, dark pain tin~. I went in and walked 
up the stain pa!it all the old pictures and no-one i.aw me. 
I walked through like a ghost. There was a slim lady 
there with dark hair, who turned her back on me. I saw 
_him too, and they embraced. I i.aw my friend Heinrich 
Muoth smile sadly and dejectedl}, a'.I he did ~metimes, · 
a! if he already knew that he would abui.e and ill-treat 
this fair lady too, and that there was nothing that could 
be done about it. It was stupid and senseless that this 
un\lappy man, this reprobate, should attract the most 
charming women, and that all my love and good inten­
tions should be in vain. 
Awakening from a sleep or do1e, I saw the grey of morn­
ing aivl a pale light in the sky through the window. I 
stretched out mv stiff limbs and felt sad and sober; the 
1so 
course that lay before le seemed gloomy and vexatious. 
First of all I now had t: think. of my father and mother. 
IJ was still grey and e ly morning when we approached 
the bridges and houses Qf. my home-town. In the smell 
and noise of the railway-station I felt so weary and exas­
perated that I did not want to leave the train. However, 
I picked up my luggage and climbed int'l the nearest 
cab, which first travelled over smooth asphalt, then over 
slightly frosty ground, then crunched along a rough 
ll'ack and stopped at the large gate of our house, which 
I had never seen closed. 
But now i\ was closed and when, dismayed and fright, 
ened, I pulled the bell, no-one came and there uas no 
response. I l<>aked up at the house and felt as if I was 
having an unpleasant wild dream. The driver looked on 
in surprise and waited. 1-·eeling wretched, I went to the 
other door which was only seldom used and which I had 
not, gone through for ,·ears. This was open. 'Wt,•n I 
went in, I found my father's o!fic~ staff sitting there 
wearing gr1•y coat'i as usual, and they were quiet and 
subduea.. They rose at my entrance for I was my father's 
heir. Klemm, the book-keeper, who did not look 1nv 
diffcrl'nt than he-had done twenty )Cars' previously, 
gave a short bow and looked at me enquiringly with a 
sad expression on his face. 
"Why is the front door locked?" I asked. 
'"There is no-one there." 
"Where is my father?" . 
"In hospital. Your mother is also there." 
"ls he still alive?" 
"He was still alive this morning, but they thb~ . 
"Tell me what has happened." 
131 
"Oh, of course, you don't knflw I It is still his fool 
We all say he had wrong treat::\:nt for it. Suddenly he 
had severe pains and screamed terribly. Then he was 
taken to hospital. Now he ,is suffering from blood­
poisoning. Yesterday, at half-past two we sent you a 
telegram." 
"I see. Th~nk you. Could }OU please have a sandwich 
and a glass of wine brought to me quickly and order a 
cab for me." 
My wishes were whispered to 110meone and then theli.e 
was silence again. Somt"one gave me a plate and a glass. 
I ate a sandwich, drank a glas11 of wine, wrnt out and 
climboo. into a cab; a horse snorted, and soon we .stood 
at the hospital gate. Nurses with white .. caps on their 
heads, and attendant!» wearing blue-striped linen suits 
passed along the corridors. Someone took me by the 
hand and led me into a room. Looking around I saw 
my IJ'-:>ther nod to me with tears in her e}CS, and in a 
low, iron bed lay my father, changed and shrunken, hi~ 
short grey beard ·standing out oddly. 
He was still alive. He opened h1'1 e,es and rec.ognised 
me despite his fever. 
1'Still comP,Osing music?" he asked quietly, and his 
voice and glance were kind as well as mocking. He gave 
me a wink which expressed a tired, ironic wisdom that 
had nothing more to impart, and I felt that he looked 
int<? my heart and 11aw and knew e\crything. 
"Father," I said, but he only smiled, glanced at me 
again half-mockingly, though alread} with a somewhat 
distracted look, and dosed his eyes again. 
"Yo11 look terrible I" said my mother, putting her 
arm around me. "Was it such a shock?" 
132 
I could not say anyt!Jing. Just then a young doctor 
came in, followed by ari older one. The dying man was 
given morphia, and tht! clever eyes that had looked so 
undentanding and omniscient a moment ago did not 
open again. We sat beside him and watched him lying 
there; we saw his face C'hange and become peaceful, and 
we waited for the end. He still lived for everal houn 
and died late in the afternoon. I could feel nothing 
but a dull sorrow and extreme weariness. I sat with 
tear-strained eyes and towards evening fell asleep i.itting 
by the de;tth-bed. 
VI 
That life is difficult, I have often bittM"ly realised. I 
now had furthet uuse for serious reftection. Right up 
to the present I have never lost th«i feeling of contft• 
diction that lies behind all lnowledge. My lif.e has been 
miserable and difficult, and yet to others ao.1d sometimes 
to m,self, it has seemed rich and wonderful. Man's life 
seems to me like a long, weary night,that would be 
intolerable if there were not occasionally flashes of light, 
the sudden brightnesf of which is so comforting and 
wonderful, that the moments of their appearance cancel 
out t..'nd justify the years of darkness. 
The gloom, the comfortless darkness, lies in the inevi• 
table course of our daily lives. Why does one repeatedly 
rise in the morning. eat, drink, and go to bed again? 
Tbr rliild, the savage, the healthy young person does 
not suffer as. a result of this qcle of repeated activities .. 
If a man does not think too much, he rejoices at rising 
id the morning, and at eating and drinking. He finds 
satisfaction in them and does not want them to be 
othnwise. But if he ceases to take things for granted, 
he seeks eagerly and hopefully during the course of the 
day for moments of real life, the radiance of which make1 
him rejoice and obliterates the awareness of time and 
all thc.r1ghts on the meaning and purpose of everything. 
One can call these moments creative, because they seem 
154 
to give a feeling of unipn with the aeator, and whilt> 
they last, one is aensib\~ of everything being necessary, 
even what is seemingly fortuitous. It is what the mystics 
call union with God. Perhaps it is the excessive radiance 
of these moments that makes evaything else appear so 
dark, perhaps it is the feeling of liberation, the enchant­
ing lightness and the suspended bliss that r 1ake the rest 
of life seem so difficult, demanding and oppressive. I do 
not know. I have not travelled very far in thought and 
pllilosophy. 
However I do know that if there if, a state of bliss and • a paradise, ia must be an uninterrupted sequence of 
such moments, and if this !!ttate nf bliss can be attlined 
through sufferiag and dwelling in pain, then no sorrow 
or pain can be so great that one should attempt to 
escapt> from it . 
• \ !LW day,s after my father's funeral-I wa,s still in a 
state of i., 1vilderment and mental exhaustion-I r"und 
myself during an aimless walk in a r.uburban street. 
The small. attractive houses awaltened vague memories 
in me 1, nkh I dwelt on until I recognised the house 
and garden of my old teacher, who had tried JO rrawrt 
me to the faith of the theosophists some )Cars ago. I 
kn()C.ked at the door and he appeared, recognised me and 
led me in a friendly manner into his room, where th•· 
pleasant smell of tobacco-smoke hovered around his 
books and plants . 
.. How are you?" asked Mr. Lohe. "Oh, of course, }'OU 
have just lost your father. You look wretched. Has it 
affected you 110 deeply?" 
-.. No," I said, "my father's death would have vfected 
me more deeply if I had still been on cool terms with 
135 
him, but during my last visit ll drew closer to him and 
rid myself of the painful fecliDB of guilt that one has 
towards good parents from wl!om one receives more 
lo,e than one can give. 
"I am glad about that." 
•:How are you going on with your theo1tophy? I should 
like you to tlllk to me, bt.-c.ause I am unhappy." 
• .. what is wrong;)" 
""'Everything I <.an't hve ,md I can't die. Eventhing 
seenu. meamngle1t1t and stupid" 
Mr. Lobe puckered up hii. Lind, peaceful l09kmg lace. 
I mu111t conf0& that e,en h111 J..ind, r.ithcr pk.mp face h.ad 
out lfle in a b.id humour, c1.nd I did not cxpec.t to obtain 
any kmd of c.omfort from him and his 1v11tdom I only 
wanted to hear him tall.., to prove his wi~om of no avail 
and to annoy him be<!ause of hi• happy state and opti­
mistic beliefs. I was not feeling friendly di,posed towards 
him dr anyone else. 
But the man wa-, not a1t self 1.itisfied and c1.bsorhed in 
his doctrine& as I had thought. He loolcd at me with 
real concern and ,.idly shool hi, fair head 
•;vo,1. .ire ill. my dear fellow," he 11a1d h1mlv Perhaps 
it is only ph"&ic.al and 1f ,o, l'OU can 110011 find ,t rernt"dy 
You must then go into the countr), worJ.. h.ird and not 
e.tt any meat. But I don't think it i. that You arc 
mentally 111icl " 
"Po you think 50;>" 
"Yes. You are 11ufl'ering from a •1c.l..ne1111 that is unfor­
tunately common and that one c.~mes acro1111 every dav 
amongst sensitive people. It is related to morc1.l insanity 
and can also be called individuali1tm or im.aginarv lone.,. 
liness. Modern books are full of it It has in11inu.ited 
156 
itself into your imaginftion; you are isolated; no ont: 
troubles about you an~ no-one understands you. Am 
I right?" 
"Almost," I admitted with surprise. 
"Listen. Those who suffer from this illness only need 
a couple of disappointments to make the1r believe that 
there is no link between them and othC"' people, that 
all people go about in a state of complete loneliness, 
th.t.t they never really understand each other, share any­
l.1'ing or have anytlting in common. It also happens that 
people wi,o suffer from this sickness become arrogant 
and regard aX other healthy pt>ople who can understand 
and love each other as flock& of sheep. If this si&n~• 
were general, .&le human race would die out, but it is 
only found amongst the upper classes in Central Europe. 
It can be curc-d in \'oung peopJe•and it is, indeed, part 
o! ah .. in~vitable period of development." 
His ironi~ professor's tone of voice annoyed me a .. ittle. 
As he did not sec me smile or look as if I wa.s going to 
defend mvsclf. the kind. concei·ned e'x.prc'l-.ion returned 
to his f.. t .. 
"Forgive me," he saiJ kindl), "mu arc suff,riw:.c:- f:'lm 
the sickness itself, not the popular carkamre of it. But 
there really is a c·ure for it. It is pure fiction that there 
is no bridge between one person and another, that 
everyone goes about lonely and misund<.Tstood. On the 
contrary, what people ha,·e in common with each olh.er 
is much more and of greater importance than what each 
person has in his own nature and "hkh makes him 
different from others." 
· "That is possible," I said, "but what ftOod d<>JI it do 
me to know all this? I am not a philosopher and I am 
137 
not unhappy because I cannot 16.nd truth. I only want 
to live a lJttle more easily and contentedly." · 
,.Well, just try I There is ncl need for you to study 
any books or theories. But an long as you are ill, you 
must believe in a doctor. Will you do that?" 
:•1 will try." 
,.Good I U-:vou were physically ill and a doctor advised 
you to take baths or drink medicine or go to the seaside, 
you might not understand why this or that remedy 
should hdp, hut you would try it aqd obey his instntc­
tions. Now do the same with what I advise yoy. Learn to 
think more about others than about yoursdf for a time. 
Jt is \he only way for you to get better." · 
"flow can I do that? Evt>ryone thinb about himself 
first." 
"You must overcomtthat. You must cultivate a certain 
indifference towards your own well-being. Learn to 
thi~: what can I do? There is only one expedient. 
You must learn to love someone so much, that his or 
her well-being is more important than your own. I don't 
mean that you should fall in love! That would give 
th~ .. q~ros.ite result!" 
"I understand, but with whom shall I try it?" 
"Begin with someone close to you, a friend or a relation. 
There is your mother. She has had a great lo'ls; she is 
now alone and needs i,omcone to comfort her. Look after 
her. and try to be of some help to her." 
· "My mother and I don't understand each other very 
well. It will be difficult." 
"If your good intentions stop short, it will indeed be 
diflicula. It's the old story of not being understood! 
You don't always want to be thinking that tfiis or that 
1ss 
person does not fully urtd,erstand you and is perhaps not 
quite fair to you. Try yourself to understand other 
people, try to please thhn and be just to them! You do 
that and begin with youi mother! Look, you must say 
to yourself: Life does' not give me much pleasure in 
any case, so why shouldn't I try this! .,.You have lost 
interest in your own life so don't give it much thought. 
Give yourself a task, inconvenience yourself a little." 
"I will try. You are right. It is all the same to me 
whatever I do. Why shouldn't I do what you advise me." 
What impressed me about his remarks-was the similar­
ity betwe;n ihem and the views on life that my father 
had expounded at our last ineeting: Live for ofh~ • 
Don't take Yiursclf '° seriously! This outlook was 
quite at variance with my feelings. It also had.a flavour 
of the catechism and mnfirma~on instruction which, 
Fi..t· , very healthy young person. I thought of with 
aversion and dislike. But ir was really not a quesfton of 
opinions and a philo.~phy of life but a practi~al attempt 
to make my unhappy life tolfiable. ·J would try it. 
I looL. ,I with surprise at this man whom I had never 
really taken seriously and whom I was now J>f'':'1.,''ing 
to act as my adviser and doctor. But he really seemed 
to .show towards me some of that lo,,e which he recom­
mended. He seemed to share my suffering and sincerely 
wished me well. In any case, I felt that I had to take 
some drastic measure to continue living and breat9ing 
like other people. I had thought of a long period of 
solitude among the mountains or of losing m}sclf in 
bard work, but instead I would obey my friendly advise? 
as I had no more faith in my experience and wisdom. 
When I told my mother that I did not intend to leave 
139 
her by henelf and hoped she tyould tum to me and 
share her life with me, she shook her head sadly. 
"Whal are you thinking of!" lhe protested gently, "it 
would not be so easy. I havf', my own way of life and 
could not make a fresh start. In any case, you ought to 
be _free and no• burdened with me." 
• "We could fry it," I said, "it may be more successful 
than you think." 
At the beginning I had enough to do to prevent me 
from brooding and giving way to despjlir. There was the 
house and an extensive business, with a&betll in our favour • and bills to be paid; there were bool, .tnd accounti., 
monc.9j loaned and money received, and it was a problem 
to know what was to become of all these,thing,. At the 
beginning I naturally wanted to sell everything, but that 
could not be done 110 lj_uickly. My mother was attached 
to the old house, m) father's will had to be executed 
and there were many difficulties. It was neces•ary for 
the book-keeper and a notary lo a,'list. The days and 
weeks passed liy with arrangements, correspondence 
about monc) and debts, and plans and di,appointment'I. 
Soqp. ~C"npld not cope with all the account• and official 
forms. I engaged a solicitor to help the notary and left• 
them to disentangle ever}'thing. 
•My mother frequently di•appointed me although I 
tried to mak.e thing• ar, easy as po,'iible for her during 
thi,.period. I relieved her of all bu,ine11s matters, I read 
to her and took her for drive,. Sometimes I felt an urge 
to tear M)SClf away and leave evcpthing, but a sense of 
shame and a certain curio,ity as to how it would turn out 
prevemed me from doing so. 
My mother thought of nothing but the deceased, and 
14.0 
ahowed her grief in ll'lall feminine acts which seemNi 
strange and often trivial to me. At the beginning I had 
to sit in ·my father's piace at table; then she considered 
it unfitting and the plac;e had to remain empty. Some­
times I could not talk i:o her enough about my father: at 
other times she became quiet and look.~t me sadly as 
soon as I mentioned his name. Most of all I missed my 
music. At times I would have given much to be able to 
play my violin for an hour, but only after many weeks 
thad passed did I venture to rlo 'io and even then she sighed 
and seem.ed offended. ~he appcart>d to be little interested 
in my effortr.to draw clo'ier to her and win her friend'thip. 
This often made me suffer and made me want ~ give­
up my attem11ts, but I continued to perse\'ere and grew 
accustomed to the succession of cheerless days, My own 
life lay broken and dead. Onlf occasionall} did I hear 
d. dun erho of the past when I heard Gertrude's voice in a 
dream, "1 when melodies from my opera sudden'ty came 
batk to me during a quiet hour. When I made a journey 
to R. to ,-ive up my rooms th\!re· and to c.ollect my 
p<>SSCS6t •ns, ever> thing connected with the place seemed 
extremely remote. I only visited Teiser, whoJt!:lrl. Lv-,.n so 
loyal to me. I did not venture to enquire about Gertrude . 
. J gradually began to fight a 'ic."Cl"et battle against my 
mother's reserved and re11igned beha\'iour, which for a 
long time distressed me exrremel)·· I often asked her to 
tell me what she would like and whethc.'1" I displeasel her 
in any way. She would then ,;troke my hand and with a 
sad smile would say: "Don"t \\orn, Ill) c-hild. I am just 
an old woman." I then b~an to male imestigations else­
where and did not disdain to make enquiries 'irom the 
book-keeper and the sernnta. 
141 
I then discovered many thinaa. The chief one WI■ 
this: my mother had one close relation and friend in the 
town; she was an unmanied cousirj She did not go about 
a .-eat deal but she was very friendly with my mother. 
My father had not liked this Miss Schniebel, and she had 
a re.al dislike ~ me so she had not been to our house 
recently. My mother had once promised Miss Schniebel 
she could com~ and live with her if she outlived my 
father, and this hope appeared to have been shattered by 
my presence. When I gradually learneq all this, I visited­
the old lady and tried to make myself as agr~able as 
possible to hc.r. Being involved in eccentricities and little 
ittrigses was new to me and caused me some amusement. 
I managed to persuade the lady to c.ome .. to our house 
again, •and I perceived that mv mother was grateful to 
me for this. To be ,ure,• they now both tried to dissuade 
me from selling the house, as I had wished, and they were 
successful in doing so. Then the lady trfod to usurp 
my place in the house and obtain the long-desired pl~c e 
of my father, from which I barred her with ID) presence. 
There wa, room for both of us, but she did not want a 
masta in .. !he house and rcfu~ to come and live with 
us. On the other hand, she visited us frequently, made 
herself indispensable as a friend in many 11mall things, 
treated me diplomatically as an important personage, 
and acquired the position of an adviser in the household, 
whiqi I could not conte1t with her. 
My poor mother did not take either her part or mine. 
She was weary and suffered a great deal as a result of 
the change in her life. Only gradually did I realise how 
much s~ missed my father. On one occasion, on going 
into a room in which I did not expect to see her, I 
141 
found her occupied at 'I wardrobe. It startled her when 
I came in, and I went out quickly. I had noticed, 
however, that she had peen handling my father's clothes, 
and when I saw her latei;, her eyes were red. 
In the summer a new battle commenced. I wanted to 
go away with my mother. We both ne?ft'ed a holiday, 
and I also hoped it would cheer her up and draw her 
closer to me. She showed little intcresL at the thought 
of travelling, but raised no objection. On the other 
.hand, Miss Schnit"bel was very much in favour of my 
mother remaining and my going alone, but I had no 
intentiod of giving way in this matter. I expected to gain 
a great deal from this holiday. I was beginning "° feel 
ill at ease in the old hou~c with my rco,tless, sorro\fl"ul • mother. I hoped to be of more help to her away from 
the place, and al'lo hoped to C'introl mv own thoughts 
·:.ul .noods better. 
So I a, a angc.-d that we ~hould &Cl off on our ;oumey 
at the end of June. We moved on dar b} da); we visited 
Constance and 7iirich and travdl(l<f over the 13rilnig Pass 
to the. scmese Oberland. My mother remained quiet 
and listless, bore patiently with the journey an4 looked 
unhappy. At lnterlakcn she ,omplained thft she could 
nQt sleep, but I persuaded her to romc on to Grindelwald, 
where I hoped we ~hou)d both feel at peace. During 
this long. senselc'ls, jo} leo,s 1ourne}, I realiiied the impos­
sibility of running awa)· and eS<.aping from ID} .own 
misery. \Ve saw beautiful green Jakes reflecting magni­
ficent old towns, we saw mountaim whirh appeared blue 
and white, and bluish-green glac iero, glistening in the 
sunlight, but we viewed even thing unmo\'ed and.without 
pleasure. We felt ashamed, but we were only depressed 
14~ 
and weary of everything. We went for walks, looked up 
at the mountains, breathed the pure, sweet air, heard 
the cow-bells ringing in the m9adows, and we said: 
.. _Isn't it lovely I " but dared not look each other in the 
face. 
We endur~it for a week at Grindelwald. Then one 
morning my mither said: "It is no me; let us go bacik. 
I 'should like f... be able to sleep again at night. If I 
become ill and die, I want to be at home." 
So I quiteh pac.ked our trunks, 11,ilently agreeing 
with her, and we travelled back quilker than we had 
come. But I felt as if I were not going, back home, 
but tQ a prison, and my mother al11,o dhplaved little 
sl'1.isfac.tion. 
On the evening of our return home, I 11:iid to her: 
"How would you feel i' I now went off alone? I should 
like to go to R. I would willingly remain with }OU if it 
served ..:iny purp011e, but we both feel ill and mi'>l'rable 
and onl} have a bad effect on ea<.h other. A.,k your 
friend to come and live with )OU. She can comfort you 
better than I." 
She tool mv hand and '>troled it gcnth ,ls was her 
won~c nodded .in<l smiled at me, and her 11,mile dis­
tinctly '>.lid: "Yei., go b) all mcan11,'" 
Despite all my effort11, and gc,od mtl'nt101111,, the onlv 
results were that we had harassed each othe1 for a c.ouple 
of months and she was more estranged from me than 
ever. Although we had lived together, each of us had 
borne his own burden, not '>haring it with the other, and 
had sunk deeper into hi., own grief and sid.ne'>'>. Mv 
attemp'il had been in vain and the best thing for me to 
do was to go and leave the wa} open for Miss Schnicbel. 
144 
I did this without delay, and, I did not know where 
else to go, I went back to R. On my departure it occurred 
to me that I no longer /,!ad a home. The town in which 
I was born, in which I.had spent my youth and had 
buried my father, did 'not matter to me '1Y more. It 
had no more ties for me and had nothi>Ag to give me 
b11t memories. I did not tell Mr. Lone on taking my 
leave from him, but his advice had not• .uelped. 
By chance, my old rooms in R. were still va<.ant. It 
.eemed like a sign to me that it is u"icless to try to break 
off associatiom, with the pai,t and ei,capc from one's 
destiny. 1 again lived in the i.ame hou"ie and rooms in 
the same town. I unpacked Dl) violin anc.l my wori,, and 
found ever}tbJng as it had been except that Muoth ffll.d 
gone to Munich, and he and Gertrude were engaged to 
be married. 
I p•d <>d up the part!t of my opera as if they were the 
ruins of 111) prev1om. life from whilh I 11till wichcd to 
try' lo build 110111ething, but the music returned very 
slowly to mv benumbed 1,oul and-only really"hurst forth 
when t.: ,. writer of all my texti, i,em me the words for a 
new song. It arrhcd .1.l a time when the old restlessness 
freqm·ntly ,returned to me, and with a feelffig' '>( shame 
aRd a thoui,and misgivin,-,s, I m.t d to walk round the 
lmthori,' g-.1rden. Tht· word it of the 1,011g were: 
The south wind roari. at night, 
Curlews hastm in their flight, 
The air ii. damp and warm. 
Desire to sleep has vani,hed now. 
Spring has arri\"cd in the night 
In the wake of the storm. 
145 
I, too, at night no longer sleep, 
My heart feels young and strong. 
Memory takes me by yie hand to peep 
Again at daya of joy and aong. 
But frightened at so bold a deed 
l~oes not linger long. 
Be still, my heart, away with pain I 
Though p.t'lllion stin again 
In blood that now Bows •lowly 
And leads to paths once known, 
These paths vou tread in vain 
For youth has Bown. 
n,~ verses afl:ected me deeply and re-awakened life 
and music in me. Re-opened and smarting St"vcrely, the 
long concealed wound 1vai. t.on'\crted into rh)thms and 
sounds. I compo11ed the music to this song, and then 
picked,up the loo,t thread'! of my opera, and after my long 
spell of inaction I agam plunged deepl) into the swift 
creative current 11rith fevensh intoxkatton until I finc11lv 
emerged to the free heights of feeling, where pain and 
bliss are no longer separate from eac.h other and all 
passiod"?irh strength in the soul pre'IS upwards in one 
steady Bame 
On the day th.it I l\rote m) new M>ng and i,howed it to 
Teiser, I walked home in the evening past an avenue of 
chestnut-treei., with a feeling of renewed strength for 
wor~ The p.io,t month'i sull gazed at me a'l if through 
masked eyes, and appeared emptv and without comfort, 
but my heart now beat more qu1c"k.ly and I 110 longer 
conceived wh} I should want to escape from my sorrow. 
Gertru~'s image arose clearly and splendidly from the 
146 
dust. I looked into her bright eyes without fear and left 
my heart unprotected to receive fresh pain. It was better · 
to suffer because of her• and to thrust the thorn deeper 
into the wound than to l_ive far away from her and flit 
about in a ghost-like manner remote from IJlY real life. 
Between the dark, heavily-laden tree-tops 'it the spread­
ing chestnut-trees could be seen the dark blue of the sky, 
full of stars, all solemn and golden, whid. extended their 
radiance unconcernedly into the distance. That was 
me nature of rhe stars. And the trees bore their buds 
and blossoms and scars for everyone to 'lee, and whether 
it signifie:J nJeasure or pain, they accepted the strong 
wi~l to live. The Oies that lived for a day whirl'¥1 on 
towards death,. Every life had its radiance and beatff'y. 
I had insight to it all for a moment, understood it and 
found it good, and also found m, life and sorrows good. 
1 1iuis!1ed my opera in the autumn. During this time 
I met Mr. Imthor at a concert. He greeted me warmly 
and' was rather surprised that I had not let him know 
that I wao; in town. He had heard that my father had 
died an.., that since then 1 had been living at home. 
"How is Mi11s Gertrude?'" I asked as calmly as possible. 
"Oh, you mur,t come and sec for }Ourself. ~he is going 
to,be married in November, and we are c.ounting on you 
to be there." 
"Thank you, Mr. lmthor. And how is Muoth?" 
"He is well. You know, I am not too happy about. the 
marriage. I have Jong wanted to ask you about •Mr. 
Muoth. As far as I know him, I have no complaints to 
make, but I have heard so many things about him. His 
name is mentioned in connection with different ;women. 
Can you tell me anything about it?" 
147 
'"No, Mr. lmthor. It would serve no purpose. Your 
daughter would hardly change her mind because of 
rumoun. Mr. Muoth is my friepd and I wish him well 
if he finds happiness." 
.. Very w~l. Will you be coming to hCC u11, soon?" 
.. I think in. Goodbye, Mr. Imthor." 
It was not long ago that I had tried to avoid all 
d>nnection witk. both of them, not bcc:-au11,C of envy or in 
the hope that Gertrude would still be drawn toward• 
me, but because I wais convinced .md felt in advanC\! 
that things would not go well with them, because I Wcl\ 
aware of Muoth's o,elf-tormenting melan<.hyly 'and ex<.it 
abilis_v and of Gertrude's •en11,ithene'IS, and becau~ 
M'arian and Lottie were ,till so vi\ld i" my memory. 
Now I thought differentl). The •battering of my 
whole life, half a ~ear •f inner lonelines, and the know­
ledge of leaving my }OUth behind me had changed me. 
I was ROW of the opinion that it wa11 foolish and danger­
ous to stretch out one's hand to alter other people'11, 
destinies. I also had no reason to think that Ill} 
hand wo1s skilful or that I could regard my.elf ol\ one 
who could help and understand other people, after mv 
attempts-rn. this direction had failed and dic,(.our.1gcd 
me Even now I strongly doubt the abilitv of people to 
al~ and shape their own live• a.nd those of other people 
to any appreci.1ble extent One <.an acquire money, 
fame and distinction, but one cannot ueate happiness or 
unh\ppinC11,\, not for oneself or for other'J. One <.an onl) 
accept what come11,, although one can, to be \ure, accept 
it in entirely different ways. As far a11 I was concerned, 
I wouli make no more strenuous endeavours to try and 
find a place in the sun, but would accept what was 
148 
allotted to me, try to make the best of it and, if possible, 
turn it into some good. 
Although life continue, independent of such reflections, 
sincere thoughts and ri5C?lutiom leave the soul more at 
peace and help one to bear the unalterc1.ble., At least, it 
subsequently appeared to me that -.incc I had become 
resigned and indifferent toward, my pcnonal fate, life 
had treated me more g<"ntly. 
That one -.oinetime-. unex.pect<.dl) achieve'! without 
tffort what one has previom,ly hecn unc1.ble to attain, 
de11pite all endca~our'i and good will, I 'IOOn learned 
through my '°other. I wrote to her even month, but had 
not heard from her for <tome time. If there ha<J. been 
anything wro~, I should hue learned about it, so I1id 
not give her much thought and continued to write my 
letters, brief notes as to how I 't'as lcepmg, in which I 
o&lW.t.)!11 included kind regard., to Mis, Schniebel. 
These greetings were recenth no longer ddhered. 
Th'e two women had done a1, the) whhed but it had not 
produced the de<,ircd rc,ulh Jmprmcd conditions had 
inftatef.i Mm 'khniebcl''I ego Immediatelv after my 
departure she trmmph,mth occupied the seat of conquest 
and settled down in our house She no,• sbai'ed the 
hou,e with hl'I' old friend and cou'lin and, after long 
year.. of want, regarded It ai, a well de'lened turn of luck 
to be able to rc-ign and gh·e her..elf air1, as one of the 
mi'ltre!i'IC'I of a dignihed hou'lehold. ~he did not ac~uire 
ex.pensive habit!i ur pro,e wa'lteful-11the had been in 
straitened drc.um<,t,uu.es ,md semi-povert) too long for 
her to do that. She neither wore more expensive clothes 
nor slept between finer linen 'iheets. On the contrary, 
she introduced i,ome worth-while economies wh:re there 
149 
was room for saving to be made-but she would noc 
renounce authority and power. The two maids had to 
obey her no leas than my mother, and she also dealt with 
servants, workmen and postmen fa an imperious manner. 
Gradually, "s de•ires are not killed by fulfilling them, 
she also extended her dominion over things that my 
mdther would not so readily concede. She wanted -to 
know about m-motl1er'1J ,isitors, even if they were 
personal, and did not like her to receive c1.nvone withour 
her being there. She did not ju'Jt want to hear extract• 
from letters that were received, parti~ularly tho\C from 
me, but wanted to read the letters hero;elf.. Finall}, she 
fonnc;l the opinion that mc1.ny thmgs in my mother's 
hoi...r:c were not done, looked after c1.nd conducted as she 
thought the} ought to be. Abo,e all, .he /onsidered that 
the discipline with the.doml',tic ..enants was not strict 
enough. If a maid went out m the evening, or talked 
too long to the postman, or if the cook a'lked for a free 
Sunday, she strongl} repro, ed ID) mother for her leniency 
and delivered long lecture, to her on the correct way to 
c.onduct a houisehold furthermore, it hurt her very 
much to see how of ten her 1 uleis for economy were grotJSly 
ignored. ~ much coal Wd.!1 ordered, and too many eggs 
accounted for by the c.ook' She bitterly opposed things 
of .that nature, and that \tas how di'JCord arose between 
the friends. 
Until then my mother had taken the line of least 
resistance although she did not agree with everything, 
and was in many ways di5appointed with her friend, 
whose relationship towardis her 11he had imagined to be 
different. Now, on the other hand, when old respected 
customs•in the house were in danger, when her every-day 
I ljO 
comforts and the peace of the house were at stake, s~ 
could not refrain from objecting and putting up soile 
resistance, although she did not do 'IO immediately. 
There were differences' oJ opinion and little arguments 
in a friendly way, but when the c.ook gave notice-and 
it was only with difficulty, after many promises and 
almost apologies that my mother per .. uaded her to stay 
-the question of authority in the hou .! bt"gan to lead 
to a real battle. 
• Miss Sclmiehel. proud of her knowledge, experience, 
thrift and organi'ling abilitie,;, c.ould not undentand why 
all these• ql\illitics were not apprcc.iated, and ,;he felt 
justified in <.ritici,;ing the previom hom,ehold ec.opomy, 
in hnding fauJt with ID) mother's hou'ie-keey;Rg' azllf in 
showing ber disdain for the cu..tom., and traditions of 
the house. Then my mother me11tioned m, father under 
who~e ,nanagemcnt e\-erything in the hou'iC had gone so 
well fo1 man) }Cars. He had not tolerated tri•ialities 
anil petty economic.,; he had gi\en the .. enants freedom 
and privilr~e,;; he h.id h.ited dhpUt<''> with the maid'! 
and inddent!t of a disagreeable nature. But when m) 
mother mentioned my father, whom <;he had previously 
criticised occ.isionallv, but who. 'oinc.c hi1' de.irti, had 
become hol} to her, Mi.,., 'i<hnichel wuld no longer 
contain her .. elf and reminded m, mother pointedly how 
~he had long ago cxprc.,.,ed he1 opmion about the 
deceased and thought it \\ ,l'> now hi~h time to abandon 
the old w.iy,; and let rea<,on 1cign. Out of consider~tion 
to her friend, ~he had not wanted to .. poil her memory 
of the decca,;ed, but no\\ that '>he had mentioned him, 
she had to confess that man\ thing .. v.hich were_un,;atis­
factory in the hou..e were due to the old master, and she 
I Ii l 
did not see why now that she was free, things should 
continue in the same way. 
That was like a blow to my mother for which she 
~uld never forgive her cousin. \.Previously it had been 
a need an~ a pleasure to grumble now and then to her 
confidential friend and to find fault with the master of 
the house, but now she would not suffer the slightest 
r~Bection to be•.:a&t upon his sacred memory. She began 
to feel that the incipient revolution in the house was 
not only disturbing, but above all ,a sin against tht 
deceased. 
This state of affairs continued without mv knowledge. 
Whe1, for the first time, m~ mother mentioned this lack 
of~11Ud:iy in a letter, even thou11,h &he qid so carefully 
and discreetly, it made me laugh. In Dl) next letter I 
omitted greetin,ri to the &pm\tcr, but did not refer to 
1ny mother's allusion,;. I thought that the women would 
settle l'he affair better without me. Be&ides, there was 
another matter which was oa.up)ing m, mind much 
more. 
October had arrived and the thought of Gertrude's 
forthcominf marriage wa'> c.on&tantly on my mind. I had 
not been to l'lcr house again and had not '>CCn her rither. 
After the wedding, when &he would be .iwa), I thought 
of-making c.ontac.t with her father again. I also hoped 
that in time a good, friendl) relation,;hip would be 
estahli&hed between Gertrude and I. We had been too 
I. dose to each other to be able to cancel out the past so 
easily, but I did not yet have the c.ourage for a meeting 
which, knowing her, &he would not have tried to avoid. 
One ~ay, someone knocked at my door in a familier 
way. Full of misgivings, I jumped up and opened it. 
15.1 
Heinrich Muoth stood there and held out his band to me. 
"Muoth I" I aied, and gripped his hand tightly, but 
I could not look into his eyes without everything coming 
back to me and hurting me. I again ~aw the letter lying 
on his table, the letter in Gertrude' hand-w..-iting, and 
saw myself taking leave from her and wanting to die. 
Now he stood there looking at me kccnh. He seemed 
a little thinner but as hand.,,>me c1.nd c1.• p1oud as ever. 
"I did not expect you," I said quif'tl). 
"Didn"t }OU? I know that you do not go to Gertrude\ 
hou~c any more. A., t.ir a, I am concerned-let U\ not 
talk about it! I ha\.e come to 'Joee how l0U .ire and al'IO 
how )Our work i!!. pro(,rre,!!.ing How i., the opera e:oin~ 
on?" 
"It is fini~hed. But first of all, how i,; Gertrude?" 
"Shf' i\ well. We are being-m;.11ricd ~oon." 
'J J now.'" 
"Well, c1.1cn't }OU going to \i,it her ,;ome time ,AOOll?°' 
"'Latt"r. I first \\,mt to \Cc.' i£ ,he got·, on well in lOUr 
hands." 
"llm ... " 
"Heinrich. forghe me. hut ,;omctime., I cannot help 
thinking about Lottie whom mu tre.ited ha~ and9beat." 
,"Forget .1bout Lottie. It ,;en e<l her right. No woman 
is beaten if 11he doesn't want to be." 
"Oh! About the opera, I don't rc.ilh J..now where I 
should ,;ubmit it hnt It would hc1.,e to be .i good theatre, 
although I don't J..now, of coUI!!.e, whether it wilt be 
accepted." 
"Oh, }CS it will. I wanted to talk to ,ou about that. 
Bring it to Munich. It will most likely be accepted there; 
people are taking an intere,;t 10 }OU. If necessary, I will 
153 
stand as guarantor for you. I don't want anyone else to 
.sing my part before I do.'' 
That was very helpful. I gladly agreed and·promised 
to arrange for copies to be ma\le as soon as possible. 
We disculJSGd details and continued to talk with some 
embarrassment, as if it was a matter of life and death 
to ·us, and yet we only wanted to pas11 the time and clese 
obr eyes to therchasm which had appeared between us. 
Muoth was the first to bridge the gap. 
"Do you remember the fint time you took me to th, 
Imthors?" he said. ••1t is a year ago now.'' 
"I know," I said, .. you don't need to reinind me. It 
woulaJ be better if you went now I " 
1Q!'~"~t yet, my friend. So you still rerpember. Well, 
if you were in love with the girl then, why didn't you 
say: 'Leave her alone, \_.ea, e her for me! ' It would have 
been enough. I should h.i,·e understood the hint.'' 
"I cc,.uldn't do that.'' 
.. You couldn't? Why not? 'Who told vou to look on 
and say nothing· until it wa'l too late?" 
"I did not know whether 11hc cared for me or not. And 
then-if she prefers you, I can't do anything about it." 
"Yob are"'-.child ! She might have been happier with 
you. Every man ha111 the right to woo a woman. 1£ ,ou 
had only said a word to me at tbe beginning. if )OU had 
just given me a hint, I should ha,c kept away. After­
wards, it was naturally too late." 
n1is conversation was painful to me. 
"I think differently about it," I said, ••and you need 
not worry. Now leave me in peace ( Give her my regards 
and I will come and visit you in Munich.'' 
.. WoA't you come to the wedding?" 
154 
'"No, Muoth, that would be in bad taste. But-are 
you being married in church?" 
"Yes, of course, at the minster." 
"I am glad about that!} have composed something for 
the occasion, an organ piece. Don't worry, .it is quite 
short." . 
•:vou are a good fellow! It's the ven· de,,·il that I 
should bring you so much bad I uck ! " 
"I think )OU should ,ay 'good luck', Muoth." 
"Well, we i.han't quarrel. I mmt go now; there are • still thin~ to buy and goodnesi. know<, what to do. You 
will send the.opera 'SOOD, won't vou? Send it to me and 
I will talc it to the right people 1mself. And befort the 
wedding the two of u., mmt !ipend an c, ening.;,;gr·lrer. 
Perhapit tomorrow! \'c<,? Well. goodb,c." 
So I was drawn into the old -.irde again and passed 
LllC mght with thought• and sorrow• that had recurred 
a hundrca timer,. I he follo~in(\ dav I ,i.,ited an organist 
whbm I knew and aslcd him to play m} music at Muoth's 
wedding. In the afternoon I went through m,· overture 
with Tctscr for the l,ut time, and in the e,ening I went 
to the inn \\here Hemrich was sta)ing. 
I found a room prepared for u, with an tfflcn fife and 
candles. Tht"re was a white doth on the table with 
Rowers and ,iher-plate. Muoth wa• alread, there waiting 
for me. 
"Now, my friend, this i'I a farewell celebration, more 
for me than for )OU. Gertrude <,ends bet r~ards. T&iay 
we i.hall drink to her health." 
We filled our glasses and silenth emptied the contents. 
"Now let us think onl) about ourselves. Youth i~ 
slipping away, m, .. dear friend, don't )OU feel ft also? 
155 
It should be the best time of one's life. I hope that is 
false, like 'all these well-known sayings. The belt should 
still lie ahead, otherwise the whole of life isn't worth 
.while. When your opera is proluced, we'll talk again." 
We relQed and drank some heavy Rhine wine. After­
wards, we sank back into the easy chain with cigars and 
champagne, and for an hour it reminded us bo1h of old 
times when we..used to take pleasure in discussing plans 
and chatting lightly. We looked at each other pensively 
but frankly and felt happy to be in each other's compan,. 
At times like these, Heinrich was kinder and more 
gracious than usual. He knew how fleeting these 
pleatures were and clung to them fondly a!!. long as his 
mr..--4.aflrlured. Quietly, \\ith a smile, h1e talked to me 
about Munich, told me little incident,; about the theatre, 
and practised his old WI of describing people and situa­
tions in a few concise word!!.. 
AftCII" he had sketched hi,; c.ondu<lor, his future father­
in-law and others amusingly and clearly but without 
malice, I drank io his health and said: "What about mf'? 
Can you describe people of my type, too?" 
"Oh, yes," he said calmly with a nod and gazed at me 
with Ms dat..:. eyes. "'You are the artist tvpe in rvcry way.· 
The artist is not, as ordinan- people 1hinl.., a jolly 'IOrt 
of person who flings out works of art here and there out 
of sheer exuberance, but unfortunateh he is muaJlv a 
poor soul who is being suffocated with ,urplus ri<hes 
and therefore has to give some of them away. It is a 
fallacy that ther~ are bappy artist,; .that i!!. just philistines" 
talk. Light-hearted Mozart kept up his spirit,; with 
• champagne and was con!!,equently short of bread, and 
why iteethoven did not commit !!,Uicide in his youth 
156 
instead of composing all that wonderful music, nCH>ne 
knows. A real artist has to be unhappy. Whenever he 
is hungry and opens his bag, there are only pearls inside 
it." 
"But if he desires a litne pleasure and waJ111lh and 
sympathy in life, a dozen operas and trios and things like 
that. don't help him much." 
"I suppose not. An hour like thi'i with f glass of wine 
and a friend. if he has one, and a pleasant chat about 
tliis remarkable life is about the ber,t thing he can expect. 
That's how it is. and we should be glad to have that at 
least. Just9think how long it takes a poor devil to make 
a good rocket: and the pleasure obtained from it hardly 
lasts a minute! In the same way one has to ~~~•e 
joy and peace c!t mind and a good com,cience to enrich 
a pleasant hour here and there. Go~ h<'alth, m, friend!" : ~:,1 not at all agree with his philo~phy, but what 
did it mat•l.rl I was glad to r,pend an evening Ji~ this 
with· the friend I feared I was going to lme and \\ho wa'i 
<.-qually uncertain about me, and I me<litated upon the 
pa"lt whi. h r,Lill la, so clo'le to me, and ,et encircled my 
youth with its carefree days which would return no more. 
Eventually the evening came to an end end Ml1oth 
offered to walk home with me, but I told him not to 
trouble. I knew that he did not like walking with me 
outside; m)' slow, halting walk irritated him and made 
him bad-tempered. He did not like being inconvenienced 
and little things like that are often the most annovdlg. 
I was pleased with m} little org.in-pi<'ce. It was a kind 
of prelude, and for me it was a detaduncnt from the 
past, thanks and goods wishes to the betrothed couple 
and an echo of happy times spent with both ot•them. 
15; 
On the day of the wedding I went to the churcll in 
good time. and concealed by the organ. looked down at 
the ceremony. When the organist began to play my 
music, Gertrude looked up alftl smiled at her &and. I 
had not ¥Cll her all this time and she looked even taller 
and slimmer than ui-ual in her white dress. Gracefully. 
with a serious expression on her face, she walked along 
the narrow, acJ.orncd path to the altar by the side of the 
proud-looking, erect man. It would not have made 1uch 
a splendid picture if instead of him. I, a cripple with, a 
crooked leg had w.tll.ed along this sdlemn path 
VII 
It was already ordained that I 11hould not dwell for long 
on my friends' wedding and that my reflections, desires 
aad self-torture should not be directed along this channel. 
I had given little thought to my mother during this 
time. I knlw, indeed, from her la<,t letter that the peace 
and comfort of the house wa'i nN all that it might be, 
but I had neither reason nor de11ire to interfcr~ ,n~rlie 
strife between tfte two ladie11 and .ic.c.epted it, just a little 
maliciously, a'i one of thoc,e things in whkh my judgment 
w-~ .. tumen-ssary. ~in<.e then I h.t.d ~ritten to her without 
receiving .111} repl}, I had enough to do with the JYOVis­
ion -and c'\.amination of rnpie, of Ill} op<.Ta without 
thinking about Mio,c, Schuicbel. 
Tben . .l rclcivcci a letter from nl} mother which sur­
prised me by its unmu.il hull alone. It w.t.11 a letter of 
distress complaining about her c.ompanion, whose l9ans­
grea.sions in the hou-.c .ind .igaimt m} mothl'r·s peace of 
mind I now learned .ihout in detail. She found it hard to 
write to me about the matter and did so with dignity and 
di11aetion. It was simpl} ~ confession of the disillusion­
ment she had &uffered in connection with her old frit!11d 
and cou&in. 
My mother did not only now <.0mplctely understand 
why my late father and I disliked l\fic,s Sc.hniebel, but she 
was now agreeable for the lmu<JC to be M>ld if ,: still 
159 
wished it, and to go and live somewhere else, if only Lo 
escape from this Schniebel woman . 
.. It might be a good thing for you to tome over. 
Luc.ie, of course. alre.ady know, wh.1t I .im thinking and 
planning-she is very 1,harp-but relation, are too 
strained for me to be .able tn tell her what i• necessary 
j.n the best possible ,u, ~he ignores my hints that I 
would prefer to be alone in the houiie ag.1in ,md that I 
could manage without her, .1nd I do not wc1nt an open 
quarrel. I know that 'the \\ ould reproach me c1nd put up 
a ,trong resii,tance 1f I .a,ked her outright to lectve. It 
would therefore he better if )OU would wme .i.nd deal 
with tbe m.atter I do not \\clllt clll\o unplcc1,antt1c,., and 
I dl't not want her to be put to c1nv cxpcn'le, but ,he 
mui,t de.arty and dchnitel) he told to go " 
I would e,en h.ne been pr<'pc1red to 'Ila) the dtagon 
if my mother had desired tt With grec1t amusement I 
made preparauon., for the JOurne} .md "tet oft' home. 
As "tOOn c11, I entered the old house, I \\a'I aware of the 
inva,ion of c1 new 1,pint The la1ge comfortable sitting 
room, in particular, had as,mned c1 gloomv, chcerleS'I and 
impo,er1shed appea1c1n<.c E,enthmg ,;ccmcd cc1rcfull) 
look .. d aftc-,md under control. 1 here wt.Te r,o called 
"runners" on the old •ohd floor, long dc11l r,tr1ps m.ule 
"frpm cheap and ugly m.11enc1l, to protec.t the 8001 boc1ulr, 
and save cleaning The old piano wht< h bad 1,tood 
unused in the dr.iwmg room for year& wc1r, al,;o cm-eloped 
in c1 protective cover, .and although my moth<T hc1d te.1 
and cakes ready for me and had \rted to make tbmgr, looL. 
as pleasant a• possible, there \\d't 'tuch an atmO'tphere of 
old maid's meticulou,;ness and naphthalene about the 
place, that as soon as I came in I smiled at Dl) mother 
16o . 
and wrink.ted up my nose. She undentood me imme­
diately. 
I bad hardly sat down when the dragon came in, 
trotted along the runnellf towards me and did me the 
honour of asking at great.length how I wao, ~ing on. 
I inquired in detail ,H to how 11he wa~ keeping and 
apologi.,ed for the old hou11e that did not pt>rhap• offer 
every comfort to which ,he wa-, accustomc<J. Taking the 
lead in the comt>nation away from my mother, ,he 
.adopted the r6le of mistre.,., of the house, ~w to the tea, 
eagerly replied to my polite remark'i and OJcemed rather 
flattered, tit.at al'io uncao,} and di-,rruo,tful about mv 
exce110Jive frienttline,;.,_ Her .,u,;piciom were aroused but 
she had no option but to accept In} courte,;ie,; .,,nd to 
respond with dt!r own .,tore of somewhat antiquated 
polite phrases. Di•playing appareni:_mutual devotion and 
e•t~cn,, tl:>c evening drew on. We hearlil) wi•hed each 
\)ther a goud night'i, o,leep and Jcft each other-m.e 
diplomat• of the old 11chool Yet, deo,pite the 11weetmeat, 
I think the df'mon did not o,lecp mnch" that night, while 
I rt>11ted ,,,ntcntedlv, and m, poor mother, after perhaps 
many night,; p.i.,r,cd in a 11tate of annm .inc.e and depre,,;­
ion, 11lcpt again for tht> hrn timt' "ith .i (eeli11g of ~ing 
the 11olc mio,tre,, in her O\\ n hou-,c. 
At breakfast the following morning, we began the 
same polite game. M) mother, l\ho had onlv lii.tened 
quietl) and intcnth· the pre,iou, c,enin~. now partici­
pated with cnjo)ment, dnd we o,e1whehned Schnie-'el 
with polite phra'le'i which dro, e ht'I" into a corner and 
made her unh.1ppv. She reali-.ed quite well that these fine 
phrase• did not come from m, mother'• heart. I almost 
felt sorry for the old maid as o,he b«ame anxiou'I, tried 
F 161 
to humble herself and praised everything, but I thought 
of the dismiued housemaid, of the discontented-looking 
cook who had only remained {or my mother's lake, I 
thought of the covered piano •nd the whole wretched 
atmosphere in my father's hitherto pleasant house, and 
I remained adamant. 
After the meal I told Ill) mother to go and lie down a 
little, and I rc-mained ,tlone with her ,ou•in. 
"Are you ac.customed to having a ,Jeep after a meal?" 
I inquired politel). "If so, don't let me disturb you. 
I wanted to talk to you about something, but it is not 
so urgent." 
"Oh, please go on. I never •leep during "the day. 
Tt:ank .u,oodness I am not so old yet. I am quite at 
your service." ' 
"Thank you Ver) ipuch, Miu 5chniebel. I wanted to 
express M) gratitude to )OU for the kindness you have 
shol\o:i toward• mv mother. She would bave been very 
lonely without )OU in thi'I large hou.,e. However, things 
are going to be changed no"." 
"What I" she cried, rising to her fret "How c1re things 
going to be changed?" 
"1'on't y.>u know yet? My mothc-r ha., at lc1.,t dl"cided 
to fulfil my old wish for her to come and live with me. 
·Naturally we cannot lea,e the old houi.e empty, '10 it 
will soon be put up for gle." 
The lady gazed at me disconc.tttedl). 
\••ves, I am sorry, too," I continued regrrtfulh. "This 
has been a very tiring time for ypu. You have taken such 
a kind and practical intc:re•t in the house that I cannot 
thank you enough." 
"Bht what shall 1---where shall 1---?" 
16.1 
"'Oh, we shall &nd a solution to that. You will of 
course have to look out for somewhere else to live, but 
ther.,: is no great hurry. You will be glad ·yourself to 
take things easier." 
She had remained stanciing. She was still polite but 
her tone of voice had become considerably sharper. 
"'l don't know what to say," she t.ried bitterl}. "'Your 
mother, sir, promised to let me live here;; it was a per­
manent arrangement. Now, after I have taken an interest 
i,i the house and helped your mother with everything, 
I am turned out into the street." 
She beg-.ln to sob and wanted to run away, but I took 
hold of her lhin hand and pressed her back into the 
easy-chair. 
"It ii; not as 4t>ad as all that," I 'laid ,;roiling. "It does 
alter circumstances a little because m\ mother wants to • r1J\. from here. However, the sale of the house was 
not decidul by hct, but bJ me, as I am the ownCA M) 
mother will see to it that )OU are not rec,tricted in your 
search for a new home and she will -make the necessary 
arrJ.ng<>. ,ems for it herself. You will thus be more 
comfortable than , ou were previou,;h and you will still, 
so to speak, be a gue .. t of hero; " 
Then came the exp<'c.tcd 1t·proachc,;, arroganc.e, weep­
ing, alternate pleading and boasting, but in the end the 
sullen woman rea'li,;ed thJ.t tht. wise,;t thing to do 1'a'i to 
accept the ,;ituation. She then withdrew to her room.and 
did not even appe,tr for wffee. 
My mother thought we ought to c,end it up to her 
room, but I wanted to ha, e m, rc~t'nge after all this 
polite pla} and let Misc, Schniebel o;ra, there in her 
mood of independence until the c,cning when. alniough 
163 
quiet and sulky, she punctually appeared for dinner. 
"Unforiunately, I have to go back to R. tomorrow," I 
said during the meal, but if you should need me for ,;iny­
thing, mother, I could always c:\lme over again quickly." 
While eaying this I did not look at her but at her 
co11sin, and she realised what I meant. My parting from 
IJcr was brief but almo111t cordial. 
"My dear," pid my mother later, "you settled that 
~ery well. Thank )OU very much. \Von't you play me 
i.omething from your opera?" 
I did not get at far as that, but a barrier had been 
broken down and a new relationship began m be estab­
lished between the old lady and me. That was the be111t 
that had,..come out of thi'I businco,s. She now had con­
fidence in me and I was pleased at the thbught of setting 
up a small household with her after my long spell of 
being homelell,\, I left my L.ind reg.irdll, to Mis!!, Schniebel 
and fieparted with a feelin& of contt'ntment. Shortly 
after my return, I began to look around here and there 
where there were &mall attra<.tiVf" bouse'l to let. Tei'ler 
helped me in thi'l rc"pe< t and hi& sill,ter mu,dly came 
along, too. They both rejoiced with me and hoped that 
botlr small cfamilies would live happill near each 01her. 
In the meantime, I had \ent the 'l<.ore of my opera to 
Munich. Two month'l later, 111hortl) after my mother'& 
arrival, Muoth wrote to me thdt it had been accepted 
but that it could not be rehearsed that sea111on. It would, 
hdwevcr, be performed at the beginning of next winter. 
So I had good news to tell my .mother. When Tei'ler 
heard about it, he danced for joy and arranged a cele­
bration. 
My mother wept when we moved into our attractive 
164 
little house, and said it was not good to be transplanted 
in one's old age, but I thought it wa, a very good move, 
as did the -Teisers, and it pleam me to !aCC how much 
Brigitte helped my motllq. The girl had few acquain­
tancei. in the town and while he1 brother mi. at the 
theatre, she often felt lonely at home, although 1,he did 
not ·adroit it. Now, 1,he often came to see u, and not only 
helped us to get ,traight and settle in, but al<,o helped 
my mother and me along the difficult path of living 
t9gether harmoniomly. Sht. knew how to make it 
cipparent to the old lady when I had the need to be 
quiet and alove; she was often at hand to help me out. 
~he al&o pointed out to me m,lm of m} mother's naed, 
and wishe<, whi'h I had never gucs,ed and about which 
my mother had nc, er told me. ~ we !iiOOD \ettled down 
in our peaceful little home. "hid1 wao, different and 
mc,re 1m,de1,t than my pre,iouo, <.onception of a home, 
but which wa1, good and pleasJnt enough for one• who 
had "not progreo,sed anv further than I had. 
My mo1!1r ... now l><·c.1mc· familiar 0\\ith ..ume of my 
mu..ic.. ~ did not like it cill and did not i.a, much about 
it, but o,hc saw and belie,ed that it wa1, not ju\t a pa11,ime 
Jnd .i game·, but th,u it waii work that was to be taken 
..e1i'ousl}, AbO\e all, ,he \\ao, surpri.,ed to hnd that the 
mmician's life, wJ1kh ,;he hacl con\idered to be very 
precarious, \\as harclh le., .... trenuous that the bm,iness 
life that 111} lcltc t.uher had lt.d. We no" found •it 
ea!iiier to talk about him and gradualh I heard numerous 
tale\ about them both, about m) gr.indparents and about 
In) own childhood. I enjr,cd hearing about the p.tst 
Jnd the family, and I n" longcr felt as if I did not bcJ.ong. 
On the other hand, mv mother learned to let me go 
165 
my own way and to have confidence in me, evelJ when I 
locked myself in my room during working houn, or when 
I was irritable. She had been v~y happy with my father 
and it had made her trial, ~it'd tribulations with the 
Schniebetwoman all the harder to bear. She now gained 
confidence again and gradually stopped talking about 
becoming old and lonely. 
In the midst" of all this comfort and modat happine11, 
the feeling of grief and diSSd.tiwacuon with which I had 
lhed so long, became submerged It did not 11mk 1" 
unfathomable depths but lingered deep down m my soul. 
It con&onted me on many a mght and ,na1ntained its 
rig~ts. The more remote the pa,t seemed, the more w.is 
I aware t,f my love and my ,orrow whicll \\ere ever with 
me as a quiet reminder. Oa-asionally, in the past, I 
thought I had been iu love. When I wao, still a youth, 
infatuated with prett) carefree Liddy, I thought I knew 
about love, then agam, when I fint saw Gertrude .ind 
felt that she was the .ino,wer to m, question-. and obscure 
wishC'I, when the pain began and pao,0,100 ,md unknown 
depths suc.ceeded friend&hip and understanding, and 
finaJly when she was lost to me, I thought I lnew wh.it 
love \\clS Mv lme for her h.ad persined and w,n alwa)S 
wuh me and I knew that I would never desire another 
woman and wi,h to kiss ,mother ~om,m'11 lip• ,ince 
Gertrude had won mv heart 
Her father, whom I v1111ted from time to ume, now 
seemed to le.no"' .about my feehnA., tow.irds he1 He 
asked me for the music of the prelude whith I hc1d 
written for her weddmg and di,playcd a quiet goodwill 
towa;ds me He muo,t have sensed how glad I wao, to 
ha,,,. news about her and how reluctant I was to .i•k, 
166 
and he paued on to me much of the contents of her 
letters. They often contained something ~bout me, 
parlicularly in regard to the opera. She wrote that a 
good singer had been f~qnd for the soprano part, and 
how pleased she would be to hear thi11, mucll beloved 
work in its entirety at la11,t. She was al'° glad that I 
now had my mother•with me. I did not know what she 
wrote about Muoah. 
My life proceeded pea<efuJly; the undercurrents no 
+anger forced their way to the 11,urface. I was working on 
a Mass and had ideas for an oraLorio for which I still 
needed thl text. When I was obliged to think about • the opera, it was like an alien world to me. My ffltl'lic 
was developing along other line'I; it wa• becoming more 
simple and mo:e pcac.eful; it• aim was to soothe, not to 
excitt> 
Ourmg. this time, the Tei11,Cro, were a great comfort to 
me. We saw each other almost ever} day. We read, 1nade 
mu11,ic, went for walks together and joined eac.h other 
on (ree d:i•.s and outingo,. Onh in tlie 'lummer, when I 
did not · .;h to hinder the!!,C 11,trenuom wallers, did we 
part for a few weeks. The Tei'ICr\ agam wandered 
around the Tirol and Voralberg, and sent me"small b~xes 
of cdelwci1111,. I. however, took m}' mother to relatives in 
North Germany, fhom 11,he visited ever~ }Car. I settled 
down by the shore of the North Sea. There, day and 
night, I heard the old 11,0ng of the sea. and in the sha~, 
fresh air it accompanied my thoughts and melodies. 
From here I had the courage to write ro Gertrude at 
Munich for the fint time, 110t to Mrs. Muoth, but to 
my friend Gcrtnide whom I told about m,· mus~ and 
my dreams. Perhaps it will give her pleasure, I thought, 
167 
and a few kind words and a friendly greeting ~n do no 
harm. Against my own will I could not help hut mistrust 
my friend Muoth, and I was continually a little woJ'l"ied 
on Gertrude's account. I kne.~ him too well, this self­
willed m~lancholy man, who was accustomed to giving 
w;ty to his moods and never made 11acrilkes for anyone, 
who was carried away by powerful urR-es and who, in 
more thoughtful hours, saw his whole life as a tragedy. 
Hit really wa11 an illness to be lonely and misundeutood, 
as my good friend Mr. Lohe had declared, then Muo~.· 
suffered more from this illneu than anyone else. 
I had no news from him. He did no,t write: Even 
~trude only sent me a short note of thanks asking me 
to tome 10 Munich earlv in the autumn, ps rehearsals for 
my opera would commence there at the beginning of 
the season. 
At the beginning of September, when we were all in 
town• again and back to our every-da,· life, the Teisers 
came to my house one e,·ening to have a look at the 
work I had done during the summt•r. Tht• mo,t impor­
tant work was a short lyrical piece for two violins and 
the piano. We played it. Brigitte sat down h~ the piano; 
above my \i1usic I could see her head and her thick' 
plaited fair hair, the top of which gleamed like gold in 
the candle-light. Her brother 'ltood be~de me and played 
the first violin part. It wa'I 11imple, lvrical music, which 
sottly pined and faded away like a 'inmmer evening, 
neither happy nor sad, hut which hovered in the mood 
of an evening that i'I ending, like a doud glowing at 
sunset. The Tci'len liked this short piece, particularh· 
Brigi'1,e. She rarely said anything about my music, but 
quirtly maintained a kind of girli,h awe towards me, 
168 
regarding me with admiration, for she considered me to 
be a great maestro. Today she took courage an,d expressed 
her•particolar pleasure. She looked at me frankly with 
her light blue eyes andt~podded so that the light glim­
mered on her blonde plaits. She was very preft.y, almost 
beautiful. 
In order to please-.ier, I took her piano part and wrote 
a dedication in pencil above the music: e"To my friend 
Brigitte Teiser," and handed it back to her. 
"That will alway& be on-r thi,; little piece now," I said 
(rclllantly and bowed. She read rhe dedi(ation &lowly and 
blushed. s1ie.held out her small &trc,ng hand to me and 
huddenly her eyes filled with tears. 
"Are you serious?" she ao,ke<l quietly. 
"Oh, y<.-s," I &aid, and laughed. "And I rhink thi,; 
pi<'<"f' of mu,;ic o,uit& }OU ver~ wclL. Mi&-. Brigirt(•." 
I w.as "llrprised to 11ee that her e,e., were o,till filled 
with tears: her reaction wa& &o eamt:lll and femininc.'-but 
I did not pa} anv further attention to the matt~. Teiser 
nolf put 1.i~ \'iolin a\\aV, and my"mother. who already 
knew l\l ,L he liked, filled the glas,;c., with wine. The 
c.onversation became liveh·. \\"c argued about a new 
operetta wltith had been produced a few \leeks ea~lier, 
and I only remembered the little incident with Brigitte 
again later in th~ e\'cning whf'n both of them departed 
and she again looked at me strangeh·. 
In the meantime, rehean,al,; had c.ommenced on ·mv 
opt•ra at Munich. As one of the prindpal part~ was•i~ 
Muoth's good handll and Gcrtrudl· h.id praised the 
soprano, the orcheMra and the thorm, became m\ chief 
concern. I left m, motbt•r in the c.ire of Ill\' friengs and 
travelled to Munic.h. 
The morhing after my arrival, I travelled along the 
0attractive f,road streets to Schwabing and to the quietly 
situated house where Muoth lived. I had almost t:'om­
pletely forgotten about the oprita. I only thought about 
him and t;ertrude and how I would find them. The cab 
stopped at an almost rural by-road in front of a small 
house which stood amongst autumnal-looking trees. 
Yellow maple .leaves lay on both sides of the road, swept 
into heaps. 
With some trepidation I went in. The house gave 111~ 
the impression o( being comfortable and prosperous. A 
· servant took my coat. 
Ir the large room into which I was led, I recognii,ed 
two large old paintings which had bee\1 brought from 
the Imthor's hou11ie. On one wall there wa, a new portrait 
of Muoth which had bren painted in Munich, and while 
I was looking at it, Gertrude came in. 
My heart beat quickly at ~eing her again after such a 
long time. She had changed into a more \Criou\, mature 
woman, but she smiled at me in the old friendly way ;and 
held out her hand to me. 
"'\{ow ar~ you?" she asked in c1 friendl> manner. "You. 
have grown older but )OU look well. We have expected 
you for a long time.'" 
She inquired about all her friends, abyut her father and 
my mother, and a, she became interei.tcd and overcc1me 
her first shyness, I regarded her in the same light a, I .. . had done an the past. Suddenly, my embarra .. ,ment 
disappeared and I talked to her· .a, to a good friend, 
told her how I had ,pent the \Ummer by the i.ea, about 
my wg,k, the Tei.en, and finally even about poor Mi .. , 
Schni,bel. 
.. And now," she exdaimed, ••your operans going to be 
performed! You wiJI be very pleased about it." 
"'Nes," J said, "but I am even more pleased· at the 
thought of hearing you.ting again." 
She smiled. "J shall be •pleased, too. I sing quite often, 
but almost always for myself alone. I shall sing all your 
songs. I have them 'here and I do not let the dust settle 
on them. Stay for a meal with us. My Jiusband will be 
coming soon and he can go along with you to see the 
'\Vnductor in the afternoon." 
We went into the music-room and .-,he.sang my songs. 
I became tiuiet and found it diffic.uh to remain calm. 
Her voice ha<I become more mature and sounded more 
confident, but it soared as easily as ever and ~anspcfrted 
me in my memory to the best days of my life, so that I 
looked at the piano ke,s as if beJitched, quietly played 
the we!l-kno~n notes and, li&tening with dosed eyes, 
could not for moments distingui,h between the pl'esent 
and the past. Did she not belong to m<' and my life? 
Were we n'>t as near to each other-as brother and sister, • and ve11· !'>SC friends? To be sure, she would have sung 
differently with Muoth ! 
We sat chatting for a while, feeling happy ancf not 
having much to la)" to each other, for we knew that no 
explanations were necessary between us. How things 
were with her an:i what her relations were like between 
her and her hu&band, I did not think about then. I 
would be able to observe that later. In any event, the 
had not swerved from her path and become untrue to 
her nature. and if she had a load to bear, she certainly 
bore it with dignitv and without binernes'§. 
An hour later, Heinrich, who had heard thar"l had 
171 
anived, came in. He immediately began to tal~ about 
the owa, which seemed more important to everyone else 
than it did to me. I uked him bow he was and how he 
liked being in Munich. 
"Like e'vcrywhere else," he said seriously. "The public 
does not like me because it feels that I do not care about 
it.• I am hardly ever favourably feceived at my hrst 
appearance. I always have to hold people first and then 
carry them away with me. I thus sucl·ecd without being 
popular. Sometimes I also sing badly, I must adIDit thar 
myself. Well, your operd will be a suc.cess-)OU can 
count on that-for you and for me. Toda~ we sh~ll go 
and• see the conductor, tomorrow wr 11,hall invite the 
soprano tp come and see u'l and whoever fl'lc )OU wii,h to 
meet. Tomorrow morning there ii, an orchestral rehearsal. 
I think you will be satJsfied." 
During lunch I ob11,crH.-d that he was ex.ceptionalh 
polite towardi, Gertrude, l\hich made me 'luspiciom,. It 
was like that the.whole time I Wd'I in l\lunkh, and I saw 
them both every day. The) were an extremeh hdn<l0i9mc 
couple and made an imprcs11ion wherever the)· went. 
Yet they were cool towards each other, and I thought • • that only <krtrude'11 strength ol d1aracter and superior 
muure made it po•sible for her to ma,l tbi,; rnolne.,, 
with a polite and dignified ,·enecr. It f PJX"ared .t'I if ,he 
had not long awalened lrom her pa11,.,ion for thi11 hand50me 
man and i,till hoped to n.-cover her former inward i,till­
ne~. In an)' event, she acted in accordanc.e with ,tood 
form. She was too well-bred and ·fine a person to pld) 
the part of the di'lillu'lioned ,md misunderstood woman 
before friends and to show her secret sorrow to anyone, 
even ff she could not hide it from me. But she could 
171 
also not have endured any look or gesture of understand­
ing or sympathy from me. We spoke and a,:ted.all the 
tin!e as if• there was no cloud over her mo1rriage. 
How long this state otafl'airs would lfe maintained was 
uncertain, and depended on Muoth, whose idcalculable 
nature I saw kept under restraint by a woman for the 
first time. I was SC:rry for both of them but I was not 
very surprised to find this situation. They had both 
enjoyed their passion; now they had either to learn 
t11signation and preserve this i.1appy time in their mem­
ory, or they must learn to find their way to a new kind 
of happin~,;s. and love. Pcrh:ips a child would bring 
them together again, not back to the abandoned Par1dise 
garden of love;, ardour, but to a new will to li'9<" together 
and to draw cloo;cr to each other. Gertrude bad the 
strf"171h and serenity of charact<J' for it, I knew. I did 
not dare to think whether Heinrich al,;o had the same 
capa«;ity. However sorrv I was that the fierce st<frm of 
their first passion and pleasure in each_ other had alread)· 
papcd, I • a!" pleased at the wa, both of them behu·ed, 
prescrvhi;, ,heir dignity and rc"ipcct not onh· in front of 
people but also in each other':, companv. 
Meanwhile, I did not acet·pt the im·itatitm to stay at 
Mnoth's hom,e, and he did llOl pref!is me. I went there 
every day and it gladdened me to 'ice that Gertrude liked 
me to come, and enjoyed c·hatting and making music 
with me, so that the pleasure was not onh mine. 
It was now definite that my opera would be perfonned 
in December. I sta~·ec:l in Munich a fortnight, was present 
at all the orchestral rcl1ea;·sals, made alterations and 
adjustments here and there, but saw the work ip good 
hands. It seemed strange to me to sec the singers, the 
173 
violinists and \flautists, the conductor and the chorus 
ec:c:upi~ with my work, which had now become alien 
to me, and had life and breath which were no lo~ 
mine . 
.. Just wut," said Heinrich Muoth, "you will soon have 
to breathe the accursed air of publicity. I almost wish 
for• your sake that the opera will dot be a success for 
you will then Jrave the mob after you. Then you will 
have to deal with locks of hair and autographs, and 
taste the approbation and kindne,;s of the admiri~ 
public. Everyone is alread) talking about )Ollr <.rippled 
leg. Anything lile that makes one popul~r (" 
A¥er the nccessarv rehearsals I cook my departure, 
arranging.to come back a few da)S befyre the perfor­
mance. Teiser asked me endless que,;tions about the 
rehearsals. He thought of numerous orchestral details 
which I had hardh con-.idered and he was more exdted 
and ahxious about the whole affair than I was. When 
I invited him and hi& sister to come with me to the 
performance, he Jumped for joy On the oth<.T hand, 1ny 
mother did not wel<.ome the winter journev and all the 
excitement, and I agreed th,ll i.he ,;hould i.t.ay behind. 
GraJually, I'began to frcl more e,dtt'd and had to tal..e 
a grlass of port at night to help me to sleep 
Winter came earh, and our little hpu\C and garden 
lay deep in snow when, one morning, the Teiscr,; called 
for me in a cab. My mother wa,ed goodbye to U'l from 
th/ window, the cab drove off, and Tc.iser, with a thick 
scarf round his n<.-ck, sang a travellfng -.ong. During the 
whole long journev he wa• lile .i boy tra,elling home 
for tly' Christma'l holiday.,, and pretty Brigitte wa11o 
glowi"lg, expres11ing her plea11ure more quietly. I was 
174 
glad of their company, for I was no longer calm, and 
awaited the events of the next few days like one under 
sentence. 
Muoth, who was wairillg for me at the railway station, 
noticed it immcd.iately. ''You arc suffering (/om stage­
&ight, young man," he said and laughed with pleasure. 
"'Thank goodness fo1· that I After all, you are a musician 
and not a philospher." 
He seemed to be right, for my excitement lasted until 
tile performance took place, a•1d I did not sleep during 
those nights. Muoth wa11 the 011I) calm penon amongst 
us all. Tefser burned with excitement; he came to every 
rehearsal and made endlec;s c-ritici1-m11. Huddled up aad 
attentive, he sat beside me during rehear!!ials,,.beat fime 
with his denc'1ed hand during difficult passages, and 
alternately praised or shook his head. 
·'The,e·s a Bute mis.11ing!" he cried out at the fir'lt 
orchestral rehearsal which he attended, so loudl)II that 
the conduc-to1 looked across at us with annoyance. 
"We ha•·: had to omit it," I said smiling . • "Omit• !lute? Wh)·? What a Ual) thing to do! Be 
careful, or they will ruin the whole overture." 
I had to laugh and hold him bac-k forcib"· becaute he 
was ·so critical. But during his favourite part, where the 
violas and cellos came in, he leaned back with dosed • eyes, pressed my hand from time to time, and afterwards 
whispered to me abashed: "That almo'lt brought tear, 
to my eyes. It is beautiful I" 
I had not yet heard the soprano part sung. It now 
seemed strange and sad to hrar it sung for the first time 
by another singer. Sh<' sang it well, and I thanked her 
as soon as she had finished, but inward!)· I thought of 
175 
the afternoon• when Gertrude had sung those words, 
.and I h.ad a feeling of unadmittcd discontent as when one 
gives a precious possession away and sees it in strange 
hands for the fu\t time. 
I saw little of Gertrude during those days. She obsened 
my acitement with a smile and let me alone. I had 
visited her with the Teisers. She rkeived Brigitte very 
warmly, and t}le girl wa, full of admiration for the 
beautiful, gracious woman. From that time she enthused 
about Gertrude and praised her volubl}, and her broth.­
did likewise. 
I can no longer remember the details of the two .da\l 
~eding the performance; everythii1g is c~nfuscd in my 
mind. Ttiere were additional reasons for excitement: 
one singer be<.ame hoarM!, another was annoyed at not 
having a larger part aqd beha, cd in an ofkndt"d mannl'r 
at the last reheari-,ll; the conductor became cooler and 
more -formal a& .i result of my dirt.'<"tion<,. Muoth c.tme 
to my aid at opportune moments, smiled c.almh J.t J.ll 
the tumult, and on this occasion was of more , aluc; to 
me than Teiser, who ran here and there and like a 
demon making critic.hm-, e\.enwhere. Brigitte looled 
at me with It:verence but also with some -,ymp.tth~ when, 
dur.ing quieter period,;, we sat together in the hotel, 
weary and rather 'lilent. 
The da'\-S passed by and the evening of the perfm­
mance arrived. \Vhile the audience was rntering the 
thiatre, I stood behind the 'ltage without ha,·ing am-thing 
more to do or to advi-,e. :Finalh·, I· sta)cd with Muoth, 
who was already in his CO\tume, and in a small room 
away from all the noi&e wa, \lowly empt)ing half a 
I bottle of c.hampagne. 
176 
"Will you have a glass?" he asked sympathetically. 
"No," I said. "Doesn't it over-excite you?" 
••what?- All the activity outside? It is always like 
that." 
"I mean the champagne." 
"Oh no, it soothes me. I alway& have a gla,;s or two 
before I want to dd anything. But go now, it is nearly 
time." 
I was led by an attendant into a private box, where I 
2.lready found Gertrude and both the Tci11<.Ts, as well 
all an important personage from the management of the 
theatre, who greeted me with a &mile. 
llicec.tly aftcrward., we heard the second bell. Gertrude 
gavt' me a fricJldlv look and nodded to me. 1eiser,•who 
&at behind me, seited m} ann and pinched it with e:ii.c.ite­
mc-nt The theatre bt'Came dark, and the i,ound,; of my 
ovt·i ture :.c,kmnly ro.,e to me from below. I now became 
ulmc;r. 
Then my work appeared before me, !iO fam,iliar and 
}C' <,o alit>· ., ""11ich no longer needed ine and had a life 
of it., oY.i .. The pka'>urei. and troubles of past days, the 
hope,; and sleeplc.,., nights, the-passion and longing of 
that period confrontt·d me, det.uhed amP transfolmed. 
Emotions expc.Tienn·d in secret were tr:msmitted clearly 
and mo\'ingl} v., a thoui.aml unknown people in the 
theatre. Muoth appeared and beg-,m singing with some 
r<.-serve. Then his voice brrew <,tronger; he let himself 
go and sang in hi., tkcply pa.,.,ion.1te manner: the sop&no 
re11,pondcd in a high. '>WCet ,·oi<.c. Then came a part 
which I wuld so well reme1.1bcr lu·aring Gertrude sing, 
which cxpre!>Scd mv ad-niration for her and was a quiet" 
confci,.,ion of m,· IO\ e. I averted m, glance anJ looked 
l'" .. I I 
into her briglit eyes which acknowledged me and greeted 
pie waz;mly, and for a moment the memory of my whole 
youth was like the sweet fragr,mce of a ripe frllit. 
From that mo-.1ent I felt moff calm and listened like 
any other•member of the audience. There was a burst 
of applause. The singers appeared before the curtain and 
bo~. Muoth was recalled a numbel"of times and smiled 
calmly down irito the now illuminated theatre. I was 
also pressed to appear, but I was far too oven.ome by 
emotion, and had no de•ire to limp out of my pleaw\},l 
retreat. 
Teiser, on the other hand, laughed with :I face Jike 
the rising sun. put hi• arm through mint" and ali.o 
impe'tuously shook. both hands o{ the imP,Ol'tant person• • f age &om the theatre management. 
The banquet w.is r~ad} and would h,nc bl.-en hdd 
even if the opera had been a failure. We travelled to 
the banquet in c.abs, Gertrude with her husband, and 
the Tt>isers and I together. During the short journey, 
Brigitte, who had not )Cl said a word, suddenly began 
to weep. At first she tried to rei.train her.elf, but she 
soon covered her face with her hands and let the tears 
ftow.• I did not like to say anything and wa• surprised 
that. Teiser wa, likewise silent and asked no question-,. 
He just put his arm around her and q1urmured a fow 
kind, comforting words as one would to a child. 
Later, during the '\baking of hand'I, good wishes and 
toalll, Muoth winked at me yrcastic.ally. People inquired 
with interest about my next work and were disappointed 
when I said that it would be an or.itorio. Then they drank 
'to my next opera, whic.h has never been written to thi,da}, 
Only'much later in the evening, when we had departed 
178 
and were going to bed, was I able to ask Teiier what was 
the matter with his sister, and why she had wept. She, 
hertelf, had long since gone to bed. My friend looked at 
me searchingly and witJ1•0spme surprise,shook his head 
and whistled, until I repeated my question. 
"You are as blind as a bat," he then flaid reproachfully. 
"Have you not notited anything then?" 
"No," I said with a growing suspicio9 of the truth. 
"Well, I will tell you. The girl has been fond of you 
fOI' a long time. Naturally, !ilae has never told me w, 
any more than she has you, but I have noticed it, and to 
tell the tru1h, I should be very happ~ if something came 
of it." 
"Oh dear I" I said with real i,adnei.s, "but what was 
the matter thi: evening?" 
"V,·:• mt"an, why did she weep? You are a child! Do 
you think wr did not M!t"?" 
"Sec: what i" 
"Good heavem! You don't need to tell me an}thing, 
an,S you w, e I ight to be i,ilent about it in the past: but 
then you sln,uld not have looked at Mrs. Muoth like that. 
Now we understand quite clearh." 
I did not ask him to leep m, i.t:tret. I lmew I c.&uld 
trui.t him. He gentl) plac.ed his hand on mv shoulder. 
"I can now w\"Jl imagine, my clear friend, all that )OU 
have gone through during thei,e ,cars without telling us 
anything. I once had a similar experienc.e 1mself. Let os 
stay together now and male good music, o,hall we? /fhd 
al~ lt'e that the girl i!t consoled. Give me ,our hand! 
It has been wonderful! Well, good-b)·e until I sec vo11 
again at homt' ! I am tr.1, elling h.ack with Brigitte 
tomorrow morning " 
I j(I 
We then parted, but he came running back .a few 
moments ~ater and said with great seriousness: "'The 
ftu~e must be included again in the next performance. 
Don't forget! " " 
That was how the day of rejoicing ended and we all 
lay awake for a long time thinking about it. I thought 
abo\Jt Brigitte, too. I bad seen a great deal of het" all 
this time and J was a good friend of hers, which was all 
I desired, just as Gertrude had been a good friend of 
mine, and when Brigitte had guessed my love for anoth1tr~ 
it was the same for her as it was for me when I had 
discovered the letter at Muoth's house and had later 
loaded my revolver. Although it made me feel sad, I 
could not.help but smile. , 
I spent most of the remainder of my days in Munkh 
with the Muoths. It was no longer like those afternoons 
in the past when the three of us first used to sing and 
play together, but in the after-glow of the perfonnance 
of the opera, there was an unspoken mutual remembrance 
of that time, and also an occasional n·-kindling of forrncr 
feelings between Muoth and Gertrude. When I had 
finally said goo_cl-hve to them, I looked hack £or a while 
at the peacdul-looking hou'§c among.,t the bare tree11. 
I hoped to return there some da) and would gladlv have 
given my little succes1 and happinc-ss :awa> in order to 
help those two in,idc to draw dose to ea<.h other again 
and for alwavs. 
180 
VIII 
After my rc1urn home, as Heinrich haq predicted, the 
results of my sucl·ess pursued me with many undesirable 
aQd also some amusing conse<tuenc.ei.. It was easy to 
dispose of commercial problems by putting matter rela­
ting to tht! opera in the hands of an agent. But there 
were also visitors, newo;paper people, publi!,hers and 
stupid letters, and it took me some time to grow ate.us-• . tomed to the small burdens of sudden fame and to 
ren>\'•·· from the first disillusionment. P<.-ople claim righn 
faom well-L.nnwn people in remaAabl<' wa)!t-110 distinc­
tion is.made between infant prodigie'I, compo.,crs,epocts, 
lhie\'es and murdcr<·n. Om· per,on wanto, the celebrity's 
pl1')t<>graph a1,other hi., autograph; a· third begs for 
mone); e,·1..,r young (olleague !,ends in hi'I work, is 
extremely flattering and ask,; for an opinion. It one doeo; 
nut answer, or if one give an unfavourabl69opinion~ the 
Si\111(' admirer sudden!) becomes bitter, uncivil and re-1ent­
ful. !\fag-.11incs .want 1hc <cld>rity's photograph, news­
papers dcllCribe his life. his origin and his appearance: 
school-friend'! remember him, and di'ltant relatives declare 
they said )Cars ago that their l'Omin would bec,9h1e 
famous somt· day. 
Amongst the letters of thh, kind whid1 harassed me, 
there was also one from !\fi'ls Schniebcl whkh amused 
me, and one from someone I had not thought a~out £or 
181 
a long time. · It was from the fair Liddy who wrote to 
,me, ~thout mentioning our toboggan-ride, but in the 
strain of an old faithful mend. She had manicd a mlUic­
teacher in her li.ome town and,gave me her address' so 
that I could soon send her all my compositions with a 
flattering dedication to her. She enclosed a photograph 
which, however, showed the well-known features grown 
older and coai;sencd. I replied to her in very cordial 
terms. 
But these little thing, belonged to the minor iss~ 
which left no import,1nt tr,1<.e behind. Even the gootl 
and re&eshing fruiti. of my sue.cc~, 11uch as t11aking the 
ac.quaintan<e of c.ultured and di11tinguic,heu people who 
had' music in their souls and did not just talk about it, 
did not b~long to my real bfe, whic.h later, d.lt in the past, 
remained detached, a,;id hac, ch,1nged very little since 
then. All that remain11 is for me to tell you of the tum 
of evC1C1ts of my closest friends. 
Old Mr. Imthor did not entertJin as much as when 
Gertrude had been there, but everv three weeks, amo11Sst 
the numerous pictures at his hou'le, he held a musical 
evening with selected c.h.imber mu-.ic, whkh I regularly 
attehded. I wmeume11 brought Tei'ler along with me, 
but.Imthor pre'Slted me to come J.nd see him apart from 
these visit•. So I sometime<. went there; in the evening, 
which wa11 his favourite time, and kept him company in 
his simph-fumished 11tudy, whert there was a portrait 
of \;ertrude on one of the walls The old gentlem,m and 
I, although out~ardl} reiserved with eJ.ch other, gradually 
came to a good undentanding and felt the need to tall 
to each other, and it wa'I therefore not rare for uis to 
talk a~'>ut what occ.upied our mind., most. I had to tell 
182 
him about Munich and I did not conceal l'he impression 
I had received of the relationship between the couple 
He-nodded understandingly. 
"Everything may yet. ~turn out all aright," he said 
sighing, "but we can't do anything. I am lookirfg forward 
to the summer when I shall have m) <.hild with me for 
twd months. I rart4y visit her in Munich and do not 
care to go there. Beside,;, she bebaH· .. ,;o bra,eh· that I • • do not want to disturb her and make her weaken." 
.Gcrtrude's letter did not bring amthing new. But 
when she visited her father round about Ea11ter, and 
also came t'o our little home, she looked thin dnd ten .. e, • 
and althougli i,he tried to be natural with m and to 
cover things uv, we often saw an expre'l!tion of unafc.u,­
tomed hopelessness on her face, whid1 ha~ bet.ome 
serin1i. I played my latco,t mw,ic-to her, hut \\hen I 
a•ked her 10 "ing something to u,. \he gently shook her 
head a.nd refu'lf'<l. 
"Another timr," she ,;aid um.crtainh: 
\Ve coul_tf all ,;ee that i,he appeared Lo be unhappv, and 
her father confessed to me later that he had sugge,;ted shr 
should remain with him for good, but ,he had refu)ed. 
"S~e loves him," I ,;aid. 
He i,hrugged his shoulders and lool..t·d at me with 
di,;trc'l'I. "I dun'\, know. \\'ho un andh'IC thi, misen ! 
But she said she wa, i,ta\ing with him for his ,;akl". He 
is so bewildered and unhapp\ and net·ds her more thail 
he thinks. J le docs not Sol\ an) thing to her, but ifl i .. 
written on hi,; face." 
Then the old man loweret.l hi,; \·oict• anti said quite 
softly and with lllhame: • She mcan5 he drinl.s." 
"He has alway,; done that a little," I said, tnmg to 
IR:_\ 
comfort him,· "but I have never seen him drunk. He 
holds himself in restraint in that way. He is a nervous 
type of person who is not used to self-discipline, 'but 
perhaps causes himself more su~ing than he does other 
people." 
Nene of us knew how terribly these two fine people 
sufkred in secret. I do not think th'.lt they ever stopt,ed 
loving each otJ1er, but deep down in their nature they 
did not belong to one another; they only drew closer 
through passion and in the intoxication of exalted hows. 
A calm acceptancf' of life and a tacit undt.Tstanding ~i 
his own nature were thing!I that Muotl1 had nlver known 
and Gertrude c.ould only bf' patient with and regre·t his 
outf>ursts, and deprei,i,iom, hi-. ,;wift t.hi\nge of mood!I, 
his continual desire for i,elf-forgctfulnei,s and into).ica­
tion, but ishe could npt d1ange or live with them. So 
thev loved each otht•r and )Cl were ne\er quite clo'I<' to 
each ,other, and while he !law hirmelf cheated of his 
secret hopes of fJnding peace and happine,;,i, through 
Gertrude, she rcali'JCd and suffered in the knowledge that 
her good intentions and !la<.rificcs were in vain, and th.u 
i,he could not comfort him and !lave him from himself. 
Thus they bu.th had their St.-cret dream and dt-arest wii,h 
sha!tered. The) could onl} remain together by maling 
i.acrihc~ and showing forbearance, am' it ,ui. brave of 
them to do this. 
I only saw Heinrich again in the summer when he 
brGught Gertrude to her father. He was more gentle 
and attentive to her and to me than I had e,·er seen him 
before. I perceived how much he feared to lose her, and 
I also felt that he would never be ablt-to bear such a lot1s. 
But slie wai. weary and desired nothing but rest and 
184 
quiet in · ordcf lo compose herself and. recover her 
strength and tranquility. We "pent one mild evening 
together in our garden. Gertrude ,;at between l\rigitte 
ana my mother, whmc ~•nd r,hc held. lleinric.h walked 
quietly lo and fro amon•g,it the ro,;e,;, and I•pla,ed a 
violin sonata with Teiscr on the terrace. The wa, 
Gertrude rco,ted thca-c and <'njo)cd tht• pcac.e of tho~ 
hour-., how Brigitt<· aflcc tion.itcly p1c .. .,cd (,lo,;e to the 
sad, beautiful woman, and how Muoth • with his head 
b(lwed walled ahout quietlv in the· .,hadc and li,;tencd 
t3 u-., arc things th.it ate indelihh stamped on my mind. 
Aftcrward~ Hcinrid1 r,c1id ,;omewhat joline,h but \\ith 
sad eye,;: ")11.,t look .it the· three women '>tiling there 
together; the onl) one amon~.,t them who l,x,'1..-, hlpp, 
i,; )Ollr moth<'r~ We ,;hould .tl,o tn to ~ow old' like her" 
After thi'i, wt· all partt·d \\,l\'i. ~luoth tr,Lvcllcd alone 
to :~·•>• ,·uth, Gertrude \\CUI with ht•r fath<'r into the 
moulllJ.in.,, the feh,·r., to ',tl'it·rm.n l, .md nn IQothcr 
and I \\•ent to the coa.,t of the Sorth ',t.a ag.,in. Theic I 
ofr_en walled along the .,bore, li,tencd. to the -rea, and 
thought a,., I had clone in m, \tmth, with J.m.uemcnt 
and horror, about the ,;ad and scmcle,., contmion of lifr, 
that one could Im c m , .iin, that people \\ Ian m<·ant ~,·c•ll 
towar-d'l t•,u h 01lwr <,hould \\Orl out their de-;tinit•, 
s<'par.itcly, e.ith.onc going hi., own ine'\.plicable wa,, 
aml how CJ.< h would lilt· to help and dr.1w dmc to the 
mhcr .in<l }Cl W,h un,tblc to do .,o, ,h in troublcJI 
mc.ininglc..s clre.101.,. I of1en thought of \fuoth\ rl'm:JtL... 
about ,outh and old age, and I wa, curiom, a,; to whether 
life would ever '>CCm .. imple an,J clt-.1r 10 nu~. \h mother 
smiled wh<'n J mentioned thir, during com cr,..ition .in<l 
lool..t.'<l really peaceful. She m.itlc lll<' fcL·1 a!lha:,1ed h, 
1~:-; 
reminding me of my friend Teiser who 1',a1 not yet old, 
but old enough to have had hi■ ■hare of experience ■ and 
yet went on living in a care&ee way like a cllild, with 
a Mozart mel004• on his lips. ~had nothing to do with 
age, I saw that clearly, and perhaps our suffering and 
ignoranc<' was only the sickness about which Mr. Lobe 
had talked to me. Or was that wise man another child 
like Teiser? 
However it may be, thinking and brooding did not 
make conditions different. When music r,tirred my beipg, 
I understood everything without the aid of woqls. I wl'i 
then aware of pure harmony in the essence •of life and 
felt that there must be a meaning and a jul.t law behind 
evelything that happened. Even if this was an illuo;ion, 
it helped ine to li\'e and was a comfort to me. 
Perhaps it would have been better if Gertrude had not 
parted from her husband for the summer. She had begun 
to rec..over, and when I saw her ag-.ain in the autumn, 
after my journey, she looked much better and capablf' 
of managing again But the hoper, we had built on tJ1io; 
improvement were destined to di'lappointment. 
Gertrude had felt better while Maying with her father 
for ~ few months. She had been abl<" to indulge in her 
n~d for rest, an<l with a feeling of relief rnuld remain in 
this quiet state without a dailr battle. just as a ti~ed 
person yield11 to sleep when left alone. It appeared, how­
ever, that she was more exhau11cd than we had thought 
an\i than ■he knew herself, for now that Muoth wc1, to 
come for her soon, she bec.ame dispirited again, did not 
sleep, and entreated her father to let her stay with him 
a little longer. 
lmt1tor war, naturally rather alarmed at this, as he 
186 
thought she would be glad to return to. Muoth with 
renewed strength and determination, but he did not 
arg4e with· her, and even cautiously sugge'>tecl a "longer 
separation for the time peing with a vitew to a divorc.e 
later. She protested agafn"st thi, with great tagitation. 
"But I love him," she cried vehementl}, "and I will 
never be disloyal t0thim. Only it ii. -.o diflkult to live 
with him! I just want to re.,t a little lonl?'J!r, perhap., 
another couple of months, until I feel i.tronger.'' 
)fr. Imthor tried to comfort her. He hunselE had no 
ogjection to having hii. child with him a little longer. 
He wrote t'b Muoth telling him that Gcrtrudt' was still 
not well and •wi-.hed to remain with him for ,omc time 
yet. Unfortunately, Muoth did not rccci,e this lfewi. 
well. During •the time the, had been ,eplrated, hi~ 
longing for hi., wife had become vcr} grl'clt. He had 
looi..rd torward to seeing her agaif1 ,tnd wa., full of good 
resolutions for <..omplctel', winning her love agaiq. 
Im1J1or\ ktLer ume as a great di,appnintmcnt to him. 
H<. immcdiateh wrotc an anhrr, kttcr full of ,m,pidon, 
about hilt father-in-law. He felt that the latter h..td 
inffuenced her agaimt him .t'i he de,11 c-d ,1 dh~olution 
of the marriage. He demanded an immec/.iatc me~ing 
with·Gertrucle, whom he hoped to l\in me1 .igain. !\fr. 
Imthor came to ,me with the letter and for a Ion~ time 
we comidcrecl what should be done. We both thought 
it would be best for a meeting hl't\\cen the rnuplc 10 he 
avoided at the moment a., Gertrude ob, iou,h c.ould .,;t 
stand anv outbursts of emotion. Imthor w .. h ven c.on­
cerned a;1d ao,kc<l me if I l\ould go to -,ee !\luoth and 
persuade him to leave Gertmdc in peace for a while.• 
I know now that I ,;hould h,l\ e <lone th.u. At tlfe time 
18j 
I had some misgivings and thought it would be unwise 
to let my friend know that I was his father-in-law's 
I confidant and acquainted with things in his· life wh.ich 
he himself did •ot wish to disalpse to me. So I declined. 
and all "that transpired was· that Mr. lmthor wrote 
another letter, which of course did not help matten. 
:However, Muoth came over without warning -and 
alarmed us.all with the scarcely restrained vehemence of 
his love and ;uspicions. Gertrude, who did not lnow 
about the short exchange of letters, was quite astonisl)~ 
and confused by his unexp<.'<'ted appearance and lt'is 
almost violent emotions. There was a painftrl scene, the 
details of which I did not learn. I only know that J\.iuoth 
urgbl Gertrude to return with him to Munich. She 
d«lared stie was ready to do as he wi'!thrd, if there was 
no alternathe, but asked to ht• allowed to remain with 
her father a little longer as &he was wt·ary and i.till 
needed rest. He then accll'led her of wanting to fori.ake 
him, and insinuated that she had been in,tigated by her 
father to do so. He he<.ame even more i.mpic.iouOJ wtaen 
she gentl~ tried to explain, and in a fit of anger and 
bitterness he was so foolii.h as to command her abruptly 
to leturn to.,him. Her pride then a,,<'rtcd iuelf. She 
rell}airu.-d c.alm but rcf ui.cd to listen to him further and 
declared that i.hc would now rt·main with her father in 
any event. The morning following this 'iCene, Muoth 
tried to conciliate her, and ashamed and repentant, he 
now granted all her wi&hes. He 1hen travt"lled back to 
.Munic.h without coming to i.cc me .. 
I was alarmed when I heard about it and i.aw the 
trouble lying ahead which I had feared from the begin­
ning. '-:After that ugly and foolii.h i.cenc, I thought, it 
188 
might noW' be i long time before she woull:l feel calm 
and strong enough to return to him, and in the mean­
tim6. there was a danger of his becoming reckle.,f, and 
despite all his longing'!, lie might beccvne even more • eitrangcd from her. He •would not long be• able to 
endure being alone in the house in whith he had hl"<.n 
happy for a time. H, would give Wa) to de.,pair, drink 
and perbaps go with other women \\ho 'Still r.an after him. 
In the meantime, all ~J.s quiet. Ht' ~rofE' t~ Gertrude 
and again a&led for her forgivenc·,,. She. .tmwered hi1 
1ti'l'::r, and in d .,,mpathetic .md fnendh manner urged 
him to be patie111 I 'lo.tl\-httle of lw1 about thi1 time. 
Occ.1.1,ionally, of tried to p< 1,uddc her to .,mg, but she 
JlW.t.)& shook her heJd \'et ,cural time'i I found he• at 
the piano. 
It i,eemed ,uJngc to me to '>CC 1hi'> bcJut1ful, proud 
wom .,1, ... bom I h.,cl c1l\\.t,, ,«.•n ,t, ,tron~. c.heerful and 
,e1cne, no,\ t.m1d .md o,hJL.cn to h<.r HI\ bemg • She 
<,<>metirnc.·, came ro 'ICC m, mother, u1c1mred in .t fncndh 
"a, ho\\ "c wc-r<. L.ec·ping, ,.u hc'>idt the old lad, on the • 1,ric, ,t•ttee £,,r" ,hort ume, .md m.ult. ,m c1ttt'mpt to th.1.1 
to her. It g1 icu"<I mt· to he.1.r her .1.ml lO ~ee ho\\ clifhc uh 
,he found u to ,mile Appt',trdnce, \\Crc. ~ pt up att H 
ndthm I nor .m,one cli,c J..nc\\ of h<·r ,orro", or regaukd 
1l ao; .1 nl"l\Ous ,tate .md phniul \\Cdl..ne,o; ~o I ,ould 
hardh lool into1 h<.r CH'!! m \\hich htr unc.onfc,..ed 
~ricf, .ibout ~hid1 I ,u1 not '!llt1ppo..ed to I..no\\, "J.lll 'iO 
dc,trh Wtitten. \\'e talked .md 11'c<l and met a!I .if 
eu·nthing \\dS the same a\ il h.1d .1.l\\J"' ht·en, and ,et 
we felt uncmnfort.1ble in CJth otht1", ptt.o,cncc and 
avoided each other In tht" nndo,t of thii, c;ad confmion 
of foding111, I \\a'> now Jnd then ,eucd b, the ,~tion, 
189 
causlnt me· sudden excitement, that her heart no longer 
belonged to her husband and that she was &ee; and it 
was now bp to me not to lose her again, but to wi11 her 
for myself anq shelter her 1¥' my side from all storms 
and sonows. I then locked tnyself in my room, played 
the passionate and yearning music of my opera, which I 
su\idenl) loved and understood aga\P, lay awake at nights 
full of lon_ging, and ag-c1in suffered all the former laugh­
able tonnentl of youth and unfulfilled desire,, no less 
intensely than in the past when I had first desired her 
and given her that single, unforgettable kiss. I fef lPil 
burn on my lips again and in a few hours.it destroyed 
the peace and resignation of )Cars. 
Only in Gertrude's prC'iencc did m} passion subside. 
El'en if I-had been foolish and ignoble et,ough to pursue 
my desires and, without consideration for ht"f busband 
who was my friend, hhd tried to win her heart, I should 
ha,~ been ashamed to show anything but sympathy and 
consideration wh~n faced b)' this sad, gentle woman, who 
was so completely wrapped up in her 'IOrrow. The more 
she suffered and seemed to lose hope, the prouder 'and 
more unapproachable did she bccome. She held her tme 
dak head -\'I ~rcctly and a'i proudh a, ever and did no: 
allow any of us to male the 'llightc\t attempt to approach 
and help her. 
ThC'IC long weeks of ominom i.ilen<c were perhaps the 
most difficult in my life. Here was Gertrude, clo\e to me 
yet unapproachable, with no way of reaching her, and 
wishing to remain alone: there wa,,'i Brigitte, whose low 
for me I knew about and with whom, after avoiding her 
for some time, a tolerable relation'ihip had again slow]} 
been •~•tablished. And amongst m, all there was my old 
190 
mother, who dw us suffering, who guessed' everything 
but did not trust herself to say anything, as I myself 
maintained• an obstinate silence and felt I could not tell 
her•anything about my own state. But yorst of all wa\ 
the horror of being compe1led to look on with th<' help­
less conviction that my bc11t friend11 were heading for 
disaster, without my. being able to rc,•c.t.J that I knew 
the reason why. 
Gcrtrudc's father M:emccl to \uflcr mo'>t ol .t.11. I h.t.d 
known him for years a'I a c lcv<.-r, vil;orou'I, 'lelf pos'le'>-.cd 
l'n:ln, hut he had now aged and d1a11gt d; he ~poJ..<' more 
quietly and•le.., calmly; he no longer joled and looked 
worried and ftliw:rable. I wc·nt to 11c·e him one day in 
Novemb<.-r, c.hicfty to hear am new11 and be c.heereda1p 
myself rather tllan to c.omfon him 
He received me in hi11 \tud,, ga,e me one of hio; 
expeu,l\'1! cir,ars and began to tJlk to me in a light, 
polite mannu. He did thio. \\ith an l'ffort and pm 
abandotled it. He looked at me \\Ith a trouhlecl <imile 
and said: "Yon want to lno\\ ho" thin~ .t.re. don't 
you't Ver) -uad, my d<"ar friend nu• child h.t.'> i.ufku·cl 
more than ~<.· knew, othcr\\i'>c ~he "<mid h.i,e dealt 
with the situation better I am in fa,onr ~f .i di\011t e 
but she will not hear of it. She lme11 him .• u lt'd.'>l '>he 
11ays so, and )Ct '>~c h afraid of him. That 10, had. I he 
child ii. ill: 11hc d0\e11 her c,e.,, will not li11tt11 to re.t',(ID 
an) more.-, and think'> c, erHhing will be all right if. 
people will only wait ,md k.t, e hc.·r in pc-ac c-. 'That ii, jr•t 
ucrvc'>, of cnnr11e, hut ht-r illnc.·.,, 'i<."em'> to he more decph· 
rooted. .Ju~t thinL., i.he l!>Omc.•times c.·, en fean that her 
husband might ill-treat her if (,he remrno, to him. and ,et 
flhe professc11 10 lm,·c him." 
191 
He did not seem to understand her :thd watched the 
c.ourse of events with a feeling of helplessness. To me, 
her sufferin~ were quite conceivably the result of cor.ftict 
between love ~nd pride. Shr was not afraid thar he 
would boat her, but that the would no longer respect him, 
and while anxiously temporising, she hoped to regain her 
staength. She had been able to coPtrol and 1teady him, 
but by dojng this had 'K> c'lthau!,ted hcnclf that &he no 
longer had c.ouhdencc in her powen; that was her illncs!,. 
She longt.-d fo1 him and ,et feared that ,he would lo-re 
him complete!) if .i frc,h attempt at .i rewndli.ition G"i<l 
not pro\ e succe, .. tul. I now ,.1w dearl) hm, futile and 
11luson my bold r,peculation1 about win.ting her love 
hal been. 
Gertrude loved h<'r hm,h.md .md ,\outtl nc,er care for 
anyone else. 
Mr. Imthor avoidect tallmg to me about Muoth a, he 
knew I W.l!, a fr iencl of hi,, but he h.it<'d him and c.m1lcl 
not under&tand how he h.id been able to attract Gertrude 
He regarded him a.. a kind of wid,ed 11oucrcr who c.,1p 
tured innocent people and ne,<'r rdea"•cl tlu·m P.i\\ion 
is alwa\\ a m,,ten and unaccountable, and unfm tun,1teh 
thllf'e is no douht that life doe<1 not ,p,1re ih pun·,t 
c}iildren .ind often it i, jmt the mo,t dl"lel\ in~ people 
who cannot help lming tho,e who de!ttro, tht·m 
During thi" troubled !tlatc of aff.tir,, I rc<chccl .1 \hort 
lctta from Muoth, which relieved the ten1tion He "rote· 
"ll>ear Kuhn, Your oprra will now he perform<'d c,en­
where, perhaps better than hero. Howc,er, I 11houlrl 
be very glad if )OU would c.ome clown ag.tm, ,c1, Ill'" 
week, when I ,ing the role in ,our opera twire. You 
knoW"'" that ffl) wife i<, ill and I am here alone You 
191 
could thus stay with me without standing on ceremony. 
Kind regards. Muoth." 
He wrote so few letters and never any unneces11ary 
oncl, that I immediately.tlecided to go . .He must need 
me. For a moment I thouglit of telling Gertrude.•Perhaps 
this was an opportunity to break down the barrier. 
Perhaps she would g,ve me a letter to take to him, or 
pass on a kind message, a11k him to come OV'-1", or even 
come with me. It was ju\t an idea, but I •did not carry 
it opt. I only visited her father before departing. 
ft was late autumn; the weather wa., wretched, wet 
and stormy. •From Munich one could at times 11cc for an 
hour the neaJ1>y mountains, which were covered with 
fresh snow. The town wao, gloom, and wet with.din. 
I travelled iun8ediatcl) to Muoth's home. Ef-cr}thing 
there was the same as it had been the prcviou~ ,·ear, the 
1,ame ~nant. the 1,ame rooms and thf! same arrangement of 
furniture, hue I he place looked uninhabited and crq,pn; 
it also la(·kcd the flower-. which Gertrude had always 
arranged. M11~th w-s not in. The sen·am took me to • my room a,,,t helped rne to unpack. I changed mv 
< lothes, and a11 my ho11t had not )Ct arri\'ed, I went down 
into the music-room, where I could ht'ar the wee1, rustlfhg 
behind the window and had time to think about the 
past. The longer J sat there looking at the pictures and 
tuming the leaves of books, the sadder I became, as if 
this houM."hold was beyond hclp. I sat down impatiently. 
by the piano in order to rid m,·self or these unprofitabll­
thoughts, and J played the Wt'dJing prelude 1\'hich I had 
composed, as if by doing so I could bring back the 
happiness of the past. 
At last I beard qukk, hcav,· footsteps close bf and 
G 
Heinrich Muoth came in. He held 06.t hii hand and 
looked at me wearily. 
"Excuie me for being late," he said, "I was bwy at 
the theatre. \i.>u know that.I_ am singing this evemng. 
Shall we eat now?" 
I followed him out of the room. I found him changed: 
he was absent-minded and apathetic. He only talked 
about the, theatre and seemed unwilling to discuss any­
thing else. Ollly after the meal. when we sat facing each 
other in the yellow cane chairs, did he say unexpecte4Jy: 
"It was very good of you to C'ome. I will makt' a speeiai 
effort this evening." 
"Thank you," I said. "You don't look •well." 
#'~on't I? Well-we shall 1oon C'hecr up. 1 am a grass-
widower!' YQu know that, don't you?" ,. 
"Yes." 
He looked away. · 
",tlave you any news about Gertrude?" 
"Nothing special.. She is still in a nervous state and 
does not sleep well---" 
"Oh well, let us not talk about it. She i'I in good hands." 
He stood up and walked about the room. I fell that 
he still wa•ttcd · to say something. He looked at me 
keenly and, I thought, distrustfully. 
Then he laughed and left it unsaid. , 
''Lottie ha,; turned up ag-c1.in," he said, changing the 
subject. 
• "Lottie?" 
"Yes, Lottie who once c.ime to see you and told you a 
tale about me. She has married someone here, and it 
appean that she still takes an interest in me. She came 
to vi:.i.t me here." 
194 
He looked. at me again slyly and laughed ldien he saw 
that I was shocked. 
"1'id you· receive her I'" I asked with 'IQme he,1 t.ltion 
"6h, you thinL. I clm.capa.ble of 1t' • No, my dear 
fellow, I had her r.ent awcly • But forgne me, I m1 talkmg 
non1»ense. I c1m .a terribly urcd, clod I hc1ve to ,mg th1c, 
evcnlng If )'OU don'• rnmd, I wall go and he down for 
an hour clod try to ,kep " 
"C.ert,unly, Hemnc.h, h.nc a good re!l.t I ~di go up 
to ,Pwn for cl whale Wall ,ou 01dc1 a cclb for me~• 
f could not ,u m th1, houc,e m ,tlcnce c1gc1m and hiiten 
to the wmd 1n the uu., I trc1\cllt.-d up to to\\n \\lthout 
,lllV clllll, c1nd \O,md<.rcd mto tht. old Art Gallt.n I looL.t•d • dt the p1ctmc, there tor half ctn hour 111 tl1< poor J1g1lt 
I hen It wc1c, ume to <.lmt ,rnd I could thmL. of notlung 
heuc..r In ,1,, than read nt.\\'>papcr, m ,1 caft. c1nd look • thro..agh the l,1r,r•· Yt1ndm1. panc..c, on to tht. \\Cl road I 
re-.c:,hul that I \\otild hrcal throuJh thh hc1rr1qr o( 
c..oolnt...,., c1t .tn) co,t and tc1ll opcnh to Hunrach 
n&tt "'hen I Cl 111ul, I found hnn ,rn1lmg ,md m a 
good humour 
"I onl) needed a good c,lcep,' he said cheerfulh "I 
feel qmte rcuu:d now \ ou mu,t pla) !I.Qlllethmg fo1 
lllt. I I ht prelude, ,r ,ou "'111 he llO good .. 
Plca,c..•d .md ,uJiPn-.cd to \Cl ,m h 1 ,;udden change m 
ham, I dul a" he w1c,hed \\. hen I had hm'lhed plaung, 
he heg.m to tall .._., he u~d to, irom<cllh .md ,omewhat 
c,ccprualh He let h1" 1ma~n.1uon run raot ,and corfl 
pktth \\on m" heatt ,1~c1111 I thought of the t>arh daH 
of our (nend,h1p, ,md \\hen \\t. ktt the hou-,e m the 
c,cmng, I looked .1round 1m ,h111t.111h and -.atrl Don't 
) ou lecp a dng no\\ • 
"No-Gertrude did not like dogs." 
W~ tri\velled to the theatre in silence. I greeted the 
conductor and was shown to a scat. I again heard. the 
well-known mtasic, but ever)'rhing was different from 
the last time. I sat alone in my box, Gertrude was absent, 
and the inan who acted and sang down there was also 
changed. He sang with fervour an.t passion. The public 
seemed to, li\e him in this role and followed it with 
enthusiasm from the beginning. But to me his fervour. 
seemed excessive and his voice too loud, almost forced. 
During the first interval I went down to ~ him. \le 
was back. in his dressing-room drinking cba&pagne, and• 
on exc.hanging a few words with him I saw that his e)es 
we're ... msteady, like those of a drunken igan. 
Afterw9ards, while Muoth was changing, I went to see 
the conductor. • "Tell me," I asked, "is Muoth ill? It seemed to me 
that•he k.ept himself going with champagne. You know 
that he is a friend of mine, don't you?" 
He looked at me in despair. 
"I don't know if he is ill, but it is quite evident that 
he is ruining himself. He has sometimes c.ome on to the 
st:ge almosl!'drunk, and if he ever misses having a drink, 
he acts and sings badly. He always used to have a glass 
of champagne before appearing, 4tn 110w he never has 
less than a whole bottle. If }OU want to give him some 
advice-but there is littlt" }OU c.an do. Muoth is 
c:ff:Jiberately ruining himseH." 
Muoth came for me and we went to 'the nearest inn 
for supper. He was languid and taciturn again as he 
had been at lunc.h-tirne, drank large quantities of dark 
port t.ine, ~or otherwi'le he cc,uld not sleep, and looked 
196 
as if he wante4 to forget at any price that-there were 
other things in the world apart &om his fatigue and 
desire for &leep. 
8n the way back in the cab J;ae revived for a moment, 
laughed and said: "Mf'-iend, if I am not t'1ere, you 
can pickle your opera; no-one else but rne could sing 
that part," 
The following morning he rose late and was still tired 
and listless, with unsteady eyes and an ashen tace. A(ter 
he had had his breakfast I took him aside and had a talk 
wkh him. 
"You are.killing ,·ourself," I said both anxiously and 
crossly. "You.revi\'e yount'lf with <.hampagne and after ... 
wards you aaturally have to pay for it. I can imal'.lne 
why you are d'9ing it, and I would not say au}·tl:ftng if 
you did not havf' a wife.-. You owe it to her to be re•p«t­
able and :..ourag<'ous, outwardly a11d inwardly." 
"Really!" He smiled weakly, evidently amused by m}· 
Yehemence. · "And what does ,ihe owe nu·? Does ,ih~ art 
courageously? SJ,-: ,;;tavs with her father and lea,•f'o, me 
all •alone. Why hould I pull ffi}'lelf togcthc-r when she 
doesn't? People alread) know that there is nothing 
betw<.'en us any longer, and ,·ou know it, too, but i'1st 
the ~amc I'hil\l' to ,;ing and entertain pcop~. I can't do 
it with the £ccling of empLine'is and dis~st which I have 
about everything. ■particularly about art." 
"All the same, }OU mu'lt turn O\'er a n<.'w leaf, Muoth ! 
It is not as if drinking made }OU happ, ! You a,e 
absolutely wretrhed ! If singing i'I too much for you at 
the moment, ask for lea,·e of abscnre; vou would obtain 
it immediately. You are not iicpendt'nt on the mone}' 
which you earn by singing. Go into the mountaws, or 
197 
to the sea, or wherever you like and get \f.rell again J And 
give up that stupid drinking! It is not only stupid, it is 
oowaidly: You know that quite well." 
He smiled ai that. "Oh yq," he said coolly. "Yoh go 
and dance a walb some timtr• It would do you good, 
believe me I Don't always he thinking about your stupid 
leg. That is just imagination!" 
"Stop it!" I cried angTih, "you know quite well that 
that is ditferem. I would very much like to dance if J 
could, but I can~t. But you can quite well pull youtself 
together and behave more sensib]~. You must definil\:]y 
gi,·e up drinking!·• 
"Defmilely! My dear Kuhn, vou mako me laugh. lr 
it iust as difficult for me to alter and give 'up drinking 
as it "is fnr you to dance. I must din1{ to the things 
that still keep up mv spirib. Do yon understand? People 
who drink arc con\"ert•.!d when the) fmd something in the 
Salvation Arm} or elsewhere that gives them more 'latih­
faction and is more enduring. There was ome something 
like that for me, namel\" women, but I <.an no lon""'r . ,i:,-
take an interest in an) other woman sim e she h,1., been 
mine and has now forsaken me, 110-__ .. 
• She has not forsaken ,ou ! She \\ill c.omc hacL .. She 
is only ill.'' 91 • 
"That is what ~-ou think and that is what she think\ . . herself, I know, but 11hc will not come hack. \Vhen a 
ship is going to sink, the rats abandon it beforehand. 
qhviously, they do no know that the 11hip i11 going under; 
the)" only have an unplea11ant 11ensation ·and run awa,, 
no doubt with the intention of soon returning." 
"Oh, don't talk like that! You have often despaired in 
your life and yet things have turned out all right again." 
198 
.. True I That'is becau11e I have found some·consol.tion 
or narcotic. Sometimes it has been a woman, sometimes 
a geod friend-yes, you are al!oO induded-at o'thef tim&'I• 
it llas been mu1tic or apf\;lu6e in the thfatre. But now 
thc-11e things no longer gn'e me pl<-ac,ufe and that i,; whv 
I drink. I <.'Ould never c,ing wirhout hro,t having a couple 
of drinJ...1,, hut now I <.an al110 not think, talk, lh.e and 
ft.•d tolerably well without hnt having a couP,le of drinks. 
An,way, you mu,., 1,top leuuring m<·, whattve~ you think. 
The same situation om e aro-.e before, about twelve ,can . . 
a,rt>. Someone le<.tured me then al1,0 and did not let me 
alone. It wa.11 about .t girl, and h} a rninc.idence it wai. 
m) hest frieml----" 
"And tht.'h i'" 
"Then I waf obliged to throw him out. A,tM" that I 
did nut h _ ,. a friend frn a long time. a'I J. matter of 
fa< t, not until \ul' <.amr alon~." 
"That is l'\·idcnt." 
"l1, it?" he i.aid mildh "Well, mu ha,·e. the cf.oice::. 
But I will i..l\ If ,1 , would he o;orn if ,ou left me in the • lnnh juoi;t now. 1 am a11.1.d1t·d to ,ou, and I h.l\e aloi;o 
thought of som<'lhing to ghe ,on plt•a'lurt•. · 
"ll,1,•e ,ou :-What i, it?" 
"l.io;tcn: \'ou ,lre foml•of m, wife, or at1eac,t )OU U'K'd 
10 b(', and I am al'lo fond of her, ,•en much -.o. :Sow. let • u" ha,c a celebration tonight. juo;t ,ou and me, in her 
honour. There i, a ,pt·d.il rt•,1,011 for it. I ha,e had a 
porn .lit ,,£ hc1 painted; i.hc had to viiii t the arilist 
frt·q\u·nth· earlit·r in tht• ,ear and I often \\ent with her. 
The portrait wai,. almost re.uh \\hen she went awa\'. 
The arti"t want<'d her to 1,i1 <hlH' more. hut I ~ew tired 
of waiting and ordered the portr.lit to he delher-1. as it 
19~, 
is. 'Chat waa a week ago, and now it&is framed and 
arrived here yesterday. I should have shown it to you at 
opce, but 'it would be better to have a celebration about 
it. Indeed, it yould not be piuch good without a tew 
glasses oi champagne. How cb~ld I enjoy it otherwise~ 
Do you agree?" 
I sensed the emotion and even /he tears behind his 
joking manner, and I cheerfully agreed, although I was 
not really iri tt1e mood for it. 
We made preparations for the celebration in honpur 
of the woman who seemed so rompletely lost to him, 'as 
she was in fact to me. 
"Can you remember which Rowers she lik~?" he asked 
me,. .. I don't know anything about flowers tit what th<', 
are caTied .. She always had some white ahd yellow ones, 
,and also some red ones. Do you know what they are?" 
"Yes, I know some of them. Why?" 
"You must buy some. Order a cab. I must go up to 
town' in any case. \Ve shall act as if she were here." 
He thought of many other things which made pc 
realise how deeply and incessantly he had thought about 
Gertrude. It made me both happy and l!it1d to observe 
thi•. Because of her: he no longer kept a dog and lived 
alone, he. wh~ i>reviously could never be without women 
for long. He had had a portrait of her p:ainted. He a'iked 
me to buy the flowcr1 that she liked. It was as if he had 
taken off a ma'ik and I saw a child'1 face behind the 
hlV"d, selfish features. 
"But," I objected, "we ought to look ht the portrait 
now, or in the afternoon. It is always better to look at 
pictures by daylight." 
.. Do,-a it matter? You can look at it again tomorrow. 
100 
I hope it is a good painting, but in truth._' it is not so 
important; we just want to look at her." 
After a rn_eal we travelled up to town and m.acfe so•e• 
putchases, first of all of flqJVers,• a large bynch of chrysan-•. . themums, a basket of roses and two bunchcs•of white 
lilac. He also had the sudden idea of having a large 
quantity of flowers 1Cnt to Gertrude in R. 
"There is something lovely about flow~," he said 
thoughtfully. I can understand Gertrude9being fond of 
tfifim· I like them too, but I cannot take the trouble to 
ldbk after anything like that. When there was no woman 
to attend ~o them, they always seemed to me to be 
uncared for •nd did not really gh·e me pleasure." 
In the ~ing I found that the new portrait~ad 
been placed iJ the music-room and was covesed \rith a 
silk clot" We had had an excellent" meal, after which 
Muot~ fint wishc tl to hear the ddding prelude. When 
I had playnf. it, he unco,·crcd the portrait and we.stood 
facing it for a while in silence. Gertrude had b"een 
paJnted full-le~ :th in a light summer drc'll:1, and her 
bright eyes loor..ed a<.ross at m trustfully from the por­
trait. It was some time before we nmld look at each 
other and tak<" each othets hand'i. Hci~ch filled 4'wo 
gl.asses with Rhmc wme~wed to the Ifl>rtrau, and we 
drank to the woizian about whom we were both thinking. 
Tht•n he carefully picked up the picture and carried it out. 
I asked him to sing something, hut he did not wish to. 
"Do you remember," he said smiling, "how \\'e spent 
an evening together before m~· wedding? Now I am a 
ba,·hclor once mo,re ,md we shail again try to cheer 
oursclve-s up with a couple of drinks and havt' a little 
pleasure. Your fri«-nd Teiser ought to be here; h•now'i 
201 
how 'lo make merry better than you and r. Give him my 
regards when )OU are back home. He can't bear n1e, but 
,ju,t thl: same ---" 
With the ste-1dily maintainq:l c.heerfulness which ltad 
always been a <.haracteristic or fiis best hours, he began 
to chat and to remind me of things that had taken place 
in the past, and I was 1.urprised at I\Pw much he remem­
bered. Evey casual little things which I thought he had 
long forgotten! had remained in his memory. He had 
also not forgotten the very first evening which I l1ad 
spent at his lmuSf', together with Marian and Kralf,l 
and the Wa} we had quarrelled. Onh· about Gertrude 
d:-1 he remain silent. He did not mention the period 
in 11hich she had come into our live'I and I 'fill glad that 
he did" no, do so. 
• I felt plea<,cd about thi" unexpected cnjo,ablc even­
ing and let him help t.im'l<'lf lih<·ralh to the good wint· 
without admoni\hing him. I L.ncw how rare the!.e mood'I • were with him, and how he chcririhed and clung to 
them when the\ occa'lionalh came, and they ne\"er Jicl • come without the aid of wine. I alM> knew that thi'I 
mood would not last long and that tomorrow he would 
again be irritable and unapproachable. Ncvertheles\, it • • gave me a feetrng of well-bemg and almmt cheerfulnec,s 
to listen to hi" <.lever. thoughtful. although perhap'I 
contradictor\" observatiom While tailing, he occa'lion 
ally directed one of his attractive glances at me. which 
ha.only did in such hours a\ the\e, and the, were lile the 
glance, of one who had jmt aw.1kened from a dream. 
At one time. when he wa .. '>ilent a,nd 'lat thinking, I 
began to tell him what m, tht·o.,ophi'>t friend had told 
me ab-.ut th,. 1.icknei.s of lonel~ people. 
202 
"Oh," lie sa!d good-humouredly, "and I suppose you 
believed him. You should have become a theologian." 
'ilWhy eh> )OU ,ay that? Aftes all, there may he some• 
thing in it." 
"Oh, of cour11c. Wise m<'n continually detnom,trate 
from time to time that everything is only imagination. 
Do·you know, I oftep u\ed to rt>ad such book,; in the pa,;t 
and I can tell you that they are of no me, Qf absolutely 
no uo,e. All that the'.le philosopherllJ writt>a.tbout is on]) a 
p:a,p1e; perhap'.I thcv comfort themsche,; with it. One 
philOM>pher prea< he., individualism betam,e he <.an't bear 
his ,ontemporaric .. , and another sodalii,m became he.., 
c.an't endurc,,being alone. It may be that our feelinr'8f 
lonelines!I ~ illness, hut one can"t do .mvthin'l a6out 
it. Sonmaml;!Ji,m i, al'.lo an illne'o'i, and that is wh) a 
fellow !1•11:, .. ;,1,r from it does in fact :rand at the edge of 
a roof, ,md whL·r "omeont:" c-all-. •ut 10 him, he falls and 
hrcal,.., hi!I, nee J..." 
... I hat i,; quite different.'" 
"M,nbc, I w• 1't .,a, I am right. I onh mc,m that one 
do<'.,n't get amwhcr<' with wi-.dom. ·1 hc·r<· are on]~ tYto 
J..indo, of wi'Jdom; all the rc!lt i!ii ju..t idle talk.'' 
"\\'hi<.h t\\o L.ind., uf 7dom do ,ou mean?" 
"\\'ell, either the wftfld i-. bad ,11./f wortble.,!ii, a,; 
Bmldbio,b and (.hristiam prc.1c.h, in \\hi<.h case oue must • do pc·nance .md 1enouncc• eHrHhing-1 belie,e one ran 
obtain pe,uc of mind in thi., \\a, -ai,cetio do not have 
c,mh a hard lik ,t!ii people· thin!... Or cl.,,• the \\orld and 
life ic, good :mtl r i~ht-tht•n one can just tale part in it 
and afterwardi. di~ pc,uefu]h·, because it ii. hni11hed--" 
"Wh.1t do ,ou bt"lieve in )uunclf?" 
"It i., no use a!lking that. Most pt>op]e helie\'e ia both. 
203 
depehdent on the weather, their health, and whether 
they have money in their purses or not. And those who• 
.reai.lly l>elieve, do not live in accordance with their beli-..--£11. 
That is bow it ;., with me, too.., For il,stance, I believe as 
Buddha did, that \ife is not worth while, but I live for 
things thin appeal to my senses as if this is the most 
important thing to do. If only it .. more satisfying I " 
It was nrt yet late when we finished. As we went 
through the adjoining room, where only a single electric 
light was burning, Muoth took. my arm and stopped spe. 
switched on all the lights and removed the c.over froln 
Gcrtrude's portrait which stood there. We lsok.ed once 
It. -.re at her dear, sweet face; then he placred the cover 
ov~the picture again and switched out tf,,!'lights. He 
came ~th,-ne to my room and put a couple of magazines 
on the table in case I should want to read. Then he took 
ID}' hand and said quie~y: "Good night, my dear ft"llow!" 
I went to bed and lav awake for .tbout half an hour 
thinking about him. Ir had mo,,ed me and made me feel 
ashamed to hear how faithfulh· he rt"memht>red all the r 
small events of our friendship. He, who found it diffirnlt 
to extend friendship, clung to rho,;e he cart>d for more 
fer~ntly tha~ I had thought 
After that I t\11 a'lleep aml ha~ confused dn·am'I atxmt 
Muoth, my opera and Mr. Lohe. When, I awoke, it wa, 
still night. I had been awakened by a fright whi<.h had 
nothing to do wi1h m)· dreams. I saw th<.' dull grey of 
ap,roaching dawn outlined again'lt the window, and h.td 
a feeling of deep angui!lh. I sat up in bC<'l and tried to 
shake off M)' sleep and to think clearly. 
Then there were heavy rapid knock11 on mv door. I 
sprang1,ut of bed and opened it. It was cold and I had 
104 
not yet switched on the light. The servant sf>Od outside, 
xantily dressed, and stared at me anxiously with eves 
ful! of terror. 
''Will you plea"se cgrae?" · he ~hi!rf>Cred, panting. 
"There has been an acc.ident." 
I put on a dressing-gown and followed the young man 
down the stairs. H~ opened a door, stood bac.k and let 
me enter. In the room there wa"I as.mall caQS: table with 
a candelabrium on it, in whic.h three thiA candles were 
b.lU'ning. By the side of the table there wa11 a di.sord<.-red 
b!d, and inside it, lying on his face, was my friend 
Heinrich 1'1uoth. 
"We must•turn him round," I 11aid softl}·· 
The ser~'\ did not tru11t himself to do it. 
"I will fctc.ti a doctor imruediatcl)·," he !laic "ltammer­
ing. 
But J cumpelk<l him to pull tthnllelf togcth<.T and we 
turned the·recumbent man o\'er. I looked at my frj.end's 
face, which was white a11d drawn. His s.hirt ·wa'i co\'ered 
w~h hlood ar";. when W<' put him down and co,·ert.-d 
him up again, hill mouth twitched slightly and his eyes 
c.ould no longer see. 
The wtvant then bcgag,to tell me ex,!5sdlv what ihad 
happcrml hut I did not~ant to know .fr1'·thing. When 
the doctor .irri~ed, Muoth wa'i alrc.idy dead. In the 
morning I 11ent a telegram to Jmthor. Then I returned 
to the 11ilent house. sat by the dead man'!-bed, listened 
to the wind in the trees outside, and only then reali.ed 
how fond I had been of thi, unfor run.ite man. I could 
not mourn for hiy1; his dt•ath had been easier than his 
life. 
In the evening I stood at the railwa~·-station dd saw 
205 
old Mr. lm~bor step out of the train, followed by a taU 
woman dressed in black. I took them back with me to' 
tl1I"! dead man, who ha<' now been dressed and plat-ed 
on his bier aDJOngst the flowers of 'the previous day. 
Gertrude 'stooped and ki~ hH pale lips. 
When we stood beside hi~ grave, I saw .i t.111, attra<.tive 
woman Mth a tear-st.aiued face. wJ.io held ro,e• in her 
hand and sJ">Od alone, and when I looked aero\& .it her 
curioush, I sa\\r that it was Lottie. She nodded to me 
and i.m.iled. But Gertrude had not wept; she looktd 
str.iight .ihead o( hl"r, attentl~eh and ~te.idfastly, in tile 
light r.iin \<.altered .ibout b) the wind, and lfeld heiYlf 
'h:~ a ,oung tree •uppoued h, fmn root-.· But it WJ.'> 
onl\ s~lf-restraint, .ind two dJ.\o, l.iter, ,·~1 ~he wc1-. 
unpacl...mgl"l\luoth'~ flower., which had me.antirne .1rri\ed 
at her houo,c, '>he hrnl...e do\\11, .ind we dul not o,ee hl'I 
tor a long tame 
1o6 
IX 
My grief, too, only cam<' to the fore later and, il'i is al way., 
the case, I thought of numerou'i in.,tance, when I had 
bren unjust to mv dead friend. Well, he had inflicted the 
I 
w"1st thin~ upon him.,clf, and 1101 onl} hi~ death. I 
mt.-ditated liar a long tinu-ahout the'ic· thinq-., and <.ould 
not find an)&hing vague or in<.omprehc·mible Jbout h;. 
fat<', and }t"l VJ" all horrible and a mr><.kt>n. It wae .10 
different with 1al) own life, .md wiLh Gertrude\ .intl th,u 
of 111.111\ Jl!•!.rs. J•.1te wa, not l..md, life wa., <apric.iou'J 
.md terrible, and then· \\.t\ 110 go<~ 01 rea,on in nature. 
nut there is good and re.non in m, m human being.,, 
with whom fortune pla\'i, .111d \\c un be iitl'onger 'than 
naiurc and fat• i( onh for .i lew hoUJ,. And we un 
,haw close to one another in time, of need, understand 
and love one ,mother, and live to comfort each other. 
And iiometimeii, when tll_f blac.k depths arc o,ilent,.we 
ran do even more. \Ve .61 then be gocAor momenh, 
stretch out .a wmmanding hand and ocate thing!» "·hich • were not there before and which, when the) .ire created, 
<ontinue to live without u,. Out of sounds, wordii and 
other frail and worthle.,, thin~. we can <.0mtruct intell«­
tual and l)rical tmii, we un, re.ite philoo,ophie11 and song!, 
full of meaning and comfort, more beautiful .ind enduring 
than the grim sport of fortune .1.nd dcstin). We can 
keep the 'ipirit o( God in our he.irt'i and, .it time'i•when 
to"; 
we ~e ful\ of Him, He can appear in our eyes and our 
words, and also talk to others who do not know or do not 
1'ish t9 know Him. We r.annot evade life's roune, but.we 
can school our,el :es to be sugerior t(I fortune and also to 
look unlinchingly upon the most painful things. 
So, during the )"ears that have passed since Heinrich 
Muoth's death, I have brought him,.to life again a thbus­
and times,,.and have been able to talk to him mort" 
wisely and afiectionately than I did when he was alive. 
And as time passed, my old mother died, and also prftty 
Brigitte Teiser who, after years of waiting and givi:bg 
the wound time to heal, married a mu"liciau, .ind did not 
,~dive her first confmement. 
vei-trudc had overcome the pain s~.~ad suffered 
when'"shc;. received our flowers as a grc~ting and plea 
from the dead. I do not often speak to her about it 
although I see her t've .. y day, but I belit>ve that she looks 
back on the ~pring-timc of her life as on a distant valley 
seen ·during a journey· a long time ago, and not as on a 
lost garden of Eden. She has regained her strength and 
serenity and al~ sings again, but since that cold kiss on 
the dead man·"I lip~. she hai. never kisSt"d another man. 
Ovce or twi<.t', during the c~1rse of the years, when ht>r 
wound healcll, and hc.T beinjf :-adiatcd the old charm, 
my thoughts travelled along the old forbidden paths and 
I asked myself: why not? But inwardly I alrcadv knew 
the answer, and that no change could be made in our 
ro1ationship towards each other. She is my friend, and 
after lonely, restless periods, when I t"inerge from my 
silence with a song or a ronata, it belongs, fint and fore­
most to us both. Muoth was right. On growing old, ont' 
becor• :s 111.-.re contented than in one's youth, whkh I 
will not therefore revile, for in all my df'eams I hear my 
yout • like a wonderful song, wt>ich now sounds even 
sweeter and more harmonious than it did in reality . 
.108 
