PENGUIN MODERN CLASSICS 

NARZISS AND GOLDMUND 


Hermann Hesse was born at Calw, Germany, on 2 July 
1877. Having begun his career as a bookseller in 
Tubingen and Basle, he started to write and to publish 
poetry at the age of twenty-one. Five years later he 
enjoyed his first major success with his novels on youth 
and educational problems: first Peter Cumenzind, then 
Untcrm Rad {The Prodigy), followed by Gertrud, Ross- 
halde, Demian, and others. Later, when as a protest 
against German militarism in the First World War he 
settled permanently in Switzerland, he established him¬ 
self as one of the greatest literary figures of the German¬ 
speaking world. Flis humanity, his searching philosophy 
developed further in such novels as Sieppenwolf and 
Narziss and Galdmund, while his poems and critical 
writings won him a leading place among contemporary 
thinkers; The Nazis abhorred and suppressed his books, 
the Swiss honoured him by conferring on him the 
degree of Ph.D.; the world, finally, by bestowing upon 
him in 1946 the Nobel Prize for Literature, an award 
richly deserved by his great novel The Glass Bead Game. 
Hermann Hesse died in 1962, shortly after his eighty- 
fifth birthday. 


GOA miv'mm- iibri 

T. ■■■'i ' ■ A.:. f* 

0B5 


Nii-a- of 











HERMANN HESSE 


NAR2ISS AND GOLDMUND 

Translated from the German 
by Geo^rey Dunlop 





PENGUIN BOOKS 




Penguin Books Ltd, Hatmonds\ 70 ith, Middlesei, England I 

Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia I 

Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 41 Steelcase Road West, Markham, Ontatio, Canada ■ 

Penguin Books (N,Z,) Ltd, i8a-i jo Waiiau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand ' ! 


CHAPTER ONE 


Fitst published by Peter Owen Ltd 1959 
Published in Penguin Books 1971 
Reprinted 1971,197: (twice), 1975 (twice), 1974 (twice) 


Copyright @ Hetmann Plesse, 1959 
All rights reserved 


Made and printed in Great Britain 
by H.w.ell Watson & Viney Ltd, 
Aylesbury, Bucks 
Set in Linotype Gtaajon 


This book is sold subject to the condition 
that It shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or othetwiae circulated 
without the publishet'a prior consent In any form of 
binding or covet other than that in which it Is 
published and without a similar condition 
including thia condition being imposed 
pa. the auhsequeot purchaser 


Isolated here in the North, planted long ago by a 
Roman pilgrim, a chestnut grew, strong and solitary, by the 
colonnade of rounded double arches at the entrance to the 
cloister of Mariabronn: a noble, vigorous tree, the sweep of 
its foliage drooping tenderly, facing the winds in bold and 
quiet assurance; so tardy in spring that when all glowed 
green around it and even the cloister nut trees wore their 
russet, it awaited the shortest nights to thrust forth, through 
litde tufts of leaves, the dim exotic rays of its blossom, and 
in October, after wine and harvests had long been gathered, 
let drop the prickly fruits from its yellowing crown; fruits 
which did not ripen every year, for which the cloister school¬ 
boys fought one another, and which Gregory, the Italian 
sub-prior, burned amid the logs of his fireplace. The lovely 
tree, aloof and tender, shadowed the entrance to the cloister, 
a delicate, shuddering guest from a warmer clime, secredy 
akin to the slender double columns of the gateway, the pil¬ 
lars and mouldings of the window arches, loved by all 
Latins and Italians, gaped at, as a stranger, by the inhabi¬ 
tants. 

Many generations of cloister schoolboys had trooped past 
beneath this stranger tree, laughing, gossiping, playing, 
squabbling, shod or barefoot, according to the season of 
the year; each with his writing-tablet; hojs with a flower 
between their lips, boys cracking nuts, boys with snowballs. 
Always there were new ones; every second year brought its 
fresh faces, though most - tousled and yellow-haired - were 
very like the boys that had passed. Some stayed and turned 
into novices, then monks, and their yellow hair was shorn. 

5 


They wore the habit and the cord, read books, taught boys, 
grew old and died. Others, at the end of their schoohdays, 
were fetched back home by their parents, into knights’ 
castles, merchants’ or craftsmen’s houses; they were let loose 
into the world, to run wild or work in it. Sometimes, 
turned into men, they would come back and look at the 
cloister, bringing little sons to put them to school with the 
patres, stand smiling for an instant, full of thoughts, as they 
saw the chestnut, and then go out again and vanish. In the 
cells and schoolrooms of the cloister, between the strong 
double redstone pillars and rounded arches, monks lived, 
taught, administered, studied, ruled. Every branch of sci¬ 
ence was pursued there, and inherited by each new genera¬ 
tion : divine and worldly lore, the dark and the light. Books 
were wrltted and annotated, systems evolved, the writings 
of the ancients collected, missals illuminated, the people’s 
belief fostered, the people’s credulity smiled upon. Here 
there was all, and room for everything, belief and learning, 
depths and simplicity, the wisdom of the Greeks and the 
Evangelists, black magic and white - all had their uses. 
There was room for repentance and solitude; room for good 
living and company. It depended on the ruling abbot, on the 
tendency prevalent at the time, which of these came upper¬ 
most for the moment, eclipsing the others. For a while the 
cloister of Mariabronn was renowned for its exorcists and 
devil-chasers; for a wliile for the beauty of its plain chaunt; 
then for a saintly father who healed and wrought miracles; 
then for its pike broth and stag’s liver pasty - each in its 
time. And ever in this tlirong of monks and scholars there 
were lukewarm and fervid fasters and rioters; always, 
among the many who lived and died there, there had been, 
here and there, an individual, one set apart from all the 
rest, whom all loved, or all feared, one who had seemed of 
the elect, who for long was remembered and talked of when 
the rest of his generation had been forgotten. 

6 


And in this age also there lived in the cloister at Maria¬ 
bronn two set apart and chosen, one old, one young. Of 
the many monks who had thronged the church, the dormi¬ 
tories and study-rooms, there were two, remarked by all, 
whom all were watching - Abbot Daniel and the teaching 
novice, Narziss, only recently entered in the novitiate, yet 
already, against all tradition, and because of his exceptional 
gifts, employed, in Greek especially, as a teacher. These 
two, the novice and the abbot, were respected and heeded 
by all the house. They were watched and aroused curiosity, 
admired and envied, slandered in secret. 

Most brothers loved the abbot; he had no enemies. He 
was full of goodness, humbleness, simplicity. Only the 
learned in the cloister strewed a pinch of scorn into their 
love of him. This abbot, they would say, might be a saint; 
certainly he would never be a scholar. His was that sim¬ 
plicity which is wisdom, but his Latin was poor, and Greek 
he altogether lacked. 

Those few who were ready on occasion to smile at the 
simpleness of the abbot were all the readier therefore to let 
themselves be charmed by Narziss - the wondrous boy, the 
beautiful young man with the elegant Greek, the manners 
and bearing of a knight, the penetrating, quiet eyes of a 
thinker, the thin, shapely, firmly outlined lips, whose bril¬ 
liant dialectic attracted scholars. Almost all the others loved 
him for the sake of his fineness and nobility. He enchanted 
many: many took no offence at the fact that he was always 
so still and self-contained, so full of courtesy. 

Abbot and novice, each in his fashion, bore on him the 
signs of special grace. Each in his own way ruled, each 
suffered with his own peculiar pain; each felt drawn to the 
other, more akin to him than to any in the cloister. 

^ Yet neither, though he sought, could find the other, 
neither could be quite thawed by the other’s presence. The 
abbot treated the novice with perfect courtesy, with every 

7 , 




gentle consideration, chiding him as one might a younger 
brother, a strangely delicate, perhaps too dangerously pre¬ 
cocious younger brother. The novice, in perfect obedience, 
heeded the abbot’s every rule and counsel; he never dis¬ 
puted, never sulked, and, if his superior’s judgement of him 
was right, and his only temptation was to pride, he could 
hide this sole fault to perfection. Nothing could be brought 
against him. He was perfect, but self-contained. There was 
only this: that few save scholars could be close friends with 
him; that his own distinction seemed to wrap him round, 
like a chill breath. 

Once, when he had confessed, the abbot said: ‘Narziss, 
l am guilty of having passed rash judgements on you. I had 
thought you proud, and perhaps I did you an injustice. 
You are much alone, brother; you have many to admire 
you, but no friends. I wished to find the pretext to chide you 
a little. But I find none. I wanted to'see you as disobedient 
as young men of your age so easily are. But you never dis¬ 
obey. Sometimes, Narziss, you make me uneasy.’ 

The young man turned his dark eyes on the old. 

‘Father, I want above all to bring you no sorrow. And it 
may well be that I am proud. I beg you to punish me for 
that. At times I have a longing to punish myself. Send me 
into solitude, father; or let me do the work of a lay brother.’ 

‘You would be too young for either, dear brother,’ the 
abbot answered, ‘and you are wonderfully gifted, my son; 
in speech and thought. By giving you the tasks of a lay 
brother T should misuse and desecrate these high gifts. 
You seem made to be a teacher and scholar. Is that your , own 
wish?’ 

‘Forgive me, father; 1 am not very clear as to my wishes. 
I shall always take pleasure in science; how could it be 
otherwise? But I do not think that learning will be my only 
service. It may not always be a man’s wishes that determine 
his destiny and his action. He may be predestined.’ 


The abbot grew more serious. Yet his old face smiled as 
he answered. ‘In so far as I have learned to know men, I 
have seen that in our 'youth we are all of us a little inclined 
to call our own wishes predestination. To what do you feel 
yourself predestined?’ 

Narziss half-closed his dark eyes, till they vanished into 
the shadow of the lashes. He did not answer. There was a 
long silence. 

‘Speak, my son,’ the abbot commanded him. In a low 
voice, his eyes to the ground, Narziss began his answer: 

‘Father, I feel sure that above all else I am destined to 
the life of this cloister. I know that I shall become a 
monk, a priest, a sub-prior; perhaps an abbot. My own 
wish is not for dignities, yet I know they will be laid upon 
me.’ 

They both were silent. 

‘What gives you this belief?’ the old man asked, un¬ 
certainly. ‘Apart from your learning what can it be in you 
that warrants you to speak these words ? ’ 

Narziss was slow with his reply: ‘It is because I have in 
me.' perception of the ways and dispositions of men; not 
mine only, but those of others. This quality in me forces me 
to serve men by ruling them. Had I no vocation to the habit 
I should have to become a judge; a ruler.’ 

‘That may be so,’ the abbot nodded, ‘but have you proved 
this faculty of yours for knowing men and their fates by any 
instance? Are you ready to give me an example?’ 

‘Yes, I am ready.’ 

‘Good, then - and since I would not pry into the hearts 
of the brothers without their knowledge, perhaps you will 
tell me, your abbot, what you know of me.’ 

Narziss raised his eyes to fix the superior. 

‘You command me, father?’ 

‘Yes, I command.’ 

‘It is hard to speak, father.’ 


9 



‘And I too, brother, find it hard to command your obedi¬ 
ence in this matter. And yet I do. So speak, then.’ 

Narziss hung his head and whispered. 

‘I know very little of you, father. I know that you are one 
of God’s servants; that you would rather herd goats, or 
ring in to matins in a hermitage and shrive the peasants, 
than rule as the head of a great cloister. I know your e.spe- 
cial devotion to Our Lady, and that it is to her you pray the 
most. At times you pray that the Greek and other learning in 
this cloister may not draw the souls under your care from 
God; at others that you may be patient with Gregory, the 
sub-prior. And at times for a peaceful end. In tills I think 
you will be heard, and that your end will be a gentle one,’ 

It was very still in the abbot’s little parlour, till at last the 
old man began to speak. 

‘You are a dreamer who has visions,’ he an.swered in, a 
friendly voice. ‘Even pious and fair visions can trick us. 

I put no trust in them, nor must you. Now, brother dreamer, 
can you see how I feel all this in my heart.'’’ 

‘Father, I can see you think very pleasantly of it. Thi.s i.s 
how you think: “This young scholar is in some small [leril; 
he has had a vision, and perhaps he meditates too much. 
Perhaps it would do him no harm if I laid a penance on 
him, and I will take the same on myself.” That is what you 
have just been thinking.’ 

The abbot rose. He dismissed the novice with a smile. 

‘It is well,’ he said. ‘Do not take your vi.sion.s too much 
in earne.st, young brother. God requires much be,sides 
visions of us. Let us say you have pleased an old man by 
telling him He will have an easy death, and that the old 
man’s heart rejoiced for an instant, to hear your promises. 
That is^ enough. Tomorrow, after early mass, you will ,say 
a Tosary,,and say it with humility and devotion; and .so will 
I. Now go, Narziss, we have said enough.’ 

On another day Abbot Daniel had to sit in judgement on 


10 


Narziss and the youngest of the teaching-fathers, who 
could not manage to agree on a certain point in the plan of 
studies. Narziss urged, very zealously, the necessity for cer¬ 
tain alterations, and could, moreover, defend them on per¬ 
suasive grounds. But Pater Lorenz, spurred on by a kind of 
envy, refused his consent to them, till their every conference 
was followed by uneasiness, sullenness, and silence, when 
Narziss, feeling himself in the right, would broach the 
subject afresh. At last, sore at heart, Pater Lorenz said to 
him: 

‘Well, Narzis.s, let us end our dispute. You know that in 
this not you but I should decide. It is for you to bend your¬ 
self to my will, who are not my fellow-teacher, but my 
helper. Yet since this matter seems to weigh so heavy on 
you, and since, although I am your superior, I am beneath 
you in knowledge and in gifts, I will not pretend to have the 
last word, but let us take our dispute to our father, the 
abbot, and ask him to settle between us.’ 

This, therefore, they did, and Abbot Daniel heard these 
two .scholars kindly and patiently, as they argued on the 
teaching of grammar. When both had spoken all their 
thoughts the old man looked at them humorously, and 
shook his white head a little as he spoke. 

‘Dear brothers, you can neither of you suppose that I 
know as much as you of the.se things. It is very commend¬ 
able in Narziss that the school should lie so close to his heart, 
and that so he seeks to better our plan of studies. But if his 
superior thinks otherwise, Narziss has only to obey and be 
silent, since all betterment in the school would weigh as 
nothing if good order and obedience in the house were 
dc.stroyed by it. I blame Narziss for not having known how 
to subject himself; and my wish for you two young scholars 
is that you may never lack a superior whose wits are duller 
than your own. No salve for pride is better than that.’ 

With this pleasant jest he dismissed them, yet certainly 

' 'H , ■ 





did not omit in the following days to observe the two very 
carefully, and himself discover if between them peace and 
good understanding reigned once more. 

Then it came about that a new face appeared in the clois¬ 
ter, which had seen so many faces come and go, and that 
this new face was not among those that pass unnoticed, and 
when they are gone, are soon forgotten. It was a little boy, 
long since announced by his father, who brought him, on 
a day in spring, to put him to school in the cloister. Under 
the chestnut tree they tethered their horses, and the porter 
had come out through the gate to meet them. The boy 
looked up at the still bare branches of the tree. ‘I have never 
seen such a tree as that till now,’ he said, ‘a rare, beautiful 
tree, and I wish I knew what they call it.’ 

The father, an elderly man, with a peaked, care-lined 
face, did not heed the words of his little son. But the porter, 
pleased already with the boy, told him the name of the 
tree. The little boy thanked him graciously, gave him his 
hand, and said to him: ‘My name is Goldmimd, and I am to 
go to school here.’ The porter smiled and led the new¬ 
comers through the gates and on up the broad stone steps. 
Goldmund entered the cloister witliout dismay, feeling that 
here he had met two beings, the tree and the porter, with 
whom he could easily be friends. 

The Pater who governed the school received them, and ’ 
towards evening, the abbot himself. To both of these this 
knight, in the service of the Emperor, presented Goldmund, 
his son, and was asked to stay a while in the guest house. 
But only for one night would he use his privilege, saying 
that next day he must ride back. As his gift to the cloister 
he left one of the horses that had borne them to it, and this 
was accepted by the monks. His talk with the priests was 
smooth and cold, but both Pater and Abbot looked with 
pleasure at the silentj respectful Goldmund; this pretty, 
fine-bred boy had pleased them at once. Next day, with few 
12 ' 


regrets, they watched the father ride off again, and were 
glad indeed to think they kept his son. Goldmund was 
taken to see his teachers, and given a bed in the scholars’ 
dormitory. He took leave of his sire with fear and reverence 
in his eyes, standing and gazing out after him, till horse and 
rider had gone from sight through the narrow arch in the 
wall of the outer court, between the mill and the granary. 
A tear still hung on his long, gold lashes as he turned; but 
the porter, who had stayed there waiting for him, clapped 
him on the shoulder pleasantly. 

‘Lording,’ he said, to comfort him, ‘don’t be sad. Most 
begin here with a little sorrow for father, mother, and 
their brethren. But you’ll soon see! You can have as good a 
life here as anywhere.’ 

' ‘Thanks, brother porter,’ said the lad, ‘but I have no 
mother and no brethren. I have only my father.’ 

‘Well, here you’ll find playfellows and learning, and new 
sports you never knew before; and tliis and that. You’ll see 
fast enough. And if you need one that means well by you, 
come to me.’ 

Goldmund smiled. ‘Oh, many thanks, brother porter. 
And now, if you would be my friend, show me quick the 
little horse that bore me hither. I would like to greet him, 
and see if he too is glad to live here.’ 

The porter led him at once into the stable, near the 
granary. There in the soft dusk it smelt sharp of horses, of 
oats and horse-dung; and Goldmund found his little brown 
horse in its stall, the horse that bore him to the cloister. He 
put his arms around the beast’s neck; it had known its mas¬ 
ter already, and stretched out its head to him. And Gold¬ 
mund set his cheek to the wide dappled forehead of the 
pony, which he stroked softly, and whispered in his ear. 
‘God keep you, Bless, my little horse, my brave one. How 
is it with you? Do you love me still? Do you think of our 
home? Plave you your bellyful? Litde Bless, my litde horse, 

^3 





my friend, how glad I am to have you stay with me. I will | 
often come to see you.’ 1 

He took from his wallet the piece of morning bread, j 

which he had kept for his horse, and broke it to give him. I 

Then he took leave, following the porter through the court- i 

yard, as wide as the market-place of a great city, and grown j 

about with its lime trees. At the inner gate he thanked and I 

gave his hand to the porter, then found he no longer knew | 

the way to his schoolroom, though yesterday they Wd shown ' 

him the direction. He laughed a litde and flushed red, j 

turned, and begged the porter to guide him, and he was very i 

glad to do so. So Goldmund came among his mates, where a ' 

dozen of lads and junkers sat on benches, and the teaching- j 

novice, Narziss, turned his head. ‘I aba the new scholar, ; 

Goldmund,’said the boy. . j 

Narziss gave him a short greeting, pointed, without a ! 

( smile, to a place on the hindmost bench, and continued at \ 
[ once with his lesson, ; 

Goldmund sat down. He was astonished to see so young ■' 
a teacher, not many years older than he; astonished, too, and j, 
very glad, to find this young teacher so handsome, so grave, 
with such fine manners, and yet so winsome and worthy 
his love. The porter had been very kind to him, the abbot | 

had welcomed him with gentleness; there in his stall stood 1 

Bless, and a little of home along with him, and here was 
this wonderful young monk, as grave as a scholar, as fine as 
a prince, with his cold, clear voice, compelling his hearers. | 
Goldmund listened gladly, though not understanding 
what the matter was. He felt at peace. He had come among 1 

good men, and was ready to love them in exchange, and I 

strive to make of them his friends. This morning in his bed, 1 

after he woke, he had felt so ill at ease, still weary with j 

the long journey, and constrained to weep as he said God- ; 

speed to his father. But now all was well and he was happy. i 

Again and again he eyed the teacher, rejoicing in his ( 

14 ; 


strength and slimness, his cold, yet glowing eyes, his firm- 
drawn lips which uttered each syllable so clearly, his soar¬ 
ing, never-wearying voice. 

But when the lesson was done, and the noisy scholars 
started up, Goldmund awoke to know with shame that he 
had sat there dozing a long while. Nor was he the only one 
to mark it; his neighbours on the bench had seen it, too, 
and whispered it around to their fellows. Scarce had the 
young Magister left his schoolroom than Goldmund’s 
shouting companions surrounded him. 

‘Awake yetf’said one with a grin. 

‘A fine scholar,’ mocked another. ‘Here’s one will be a 
shining Church light. His first lesson sends him to sleep.’ 

‘Carry the babe to bed,’ proposed a tliird, and they 
pounced on his arms and legs, and lifted him high, with 
shouts of mockery. 

They had scared him so that Goldmund began to grow 
angry. He struck out around him on all sides, trying to 
free himself, and earned some clouts, till he ended by 
sprawling on the ground, though one still had him by the 
foot. From him he kicked himself loose, and was soon en¬ 
gaged in a bout with him. His enemy was a tall, strong lad, 
and all gathered in to watch the battle. But Goldmund stood 
his ground; he had several times clouted his strong enemy, 
and won himself friends among his fellows before any so 
much as knew his name. Suddenly they all ran off and were 
scarce gone than along came Pater Martin, the brother- 
schoolmaster, and stood looking down on Goldmund, left 
alone. He gazed in doubt at the boy, whose blue eyes an¬ 
swered him perplexed, his face a little flushed and dis¬ 
mayed. , 

‘Well, and how is it with you?’ he asked him. ‘You are 
Goldmund - are you? Have those scamps been doing you 
any harm?’ 

‘Oh no,’said the boy, ‘I held my own with them.’ 


‘But with which?’ 

‘How can I tell? I know none here yet. One of them 
fought me.’ 

‘Oho! And did he begin it?’ 

‘How should I know? No, I think it wei.s I began it. They 
set on me, and so I grew angry.’ 

‘Well, sir, this is a fine beginning. Listen to me. If you 
fight again in the schoolroom you’ll be whipped for it. And 
now - be off with you to supper.’ 

With a smile he stood looking after Goldmund, as the boy 
ran off, abashed, after the others, trying, as he ran, to 
smooth down his yellow hair with his fingers. 

Goldmund himself agreed that his first deed here in the 
cloister had been a very rash and rebellious one. He felt 
ashamed, as he sought and joined his fellows at supper. 
But they welcomed him among them with respect, he made 
knightly peace with his enemy, and from that day on knew 
himself well liked by the scholars. 


CHAPTER TWO 


Tfioooii he made good friends wiiti all Coldmund could 
noi: at once find a true friend. 1'liere was none among his 
companions to whom he felt do.sely .akin, tlioiigli they them¬ 
selves were all ;ima/.e(,l to di.'icover a very [icaccful com¬ 
panion iri this bold fighter, who had struck out right and 

But now this Coldmund seemed to strive to become the 
luist ;a:holar in tlu^ school. Them were two in the cloister 
to whom he was drawn to love, who pleased him .anti filled 
hi:; thoiiglits, foi’ whetm lie felt dee|i atlniiralion and rever¬ 
ence: Abbot H.aiiiel and the teaeliing-novice N.ar/iss. The 
ylhot he felt to ht: Iwly; his good and simple w:iys, his 
liiirnhle rule, comtnanthng as though it fkfered service, his 
still i-enileiiess ami peace - all litcse dnw tioldiiiund 
powerfully to him. He wouhJ liave liked laest of all to be¬ 
come I lie liody-servant d this saint:, would liave fmaight 
him, as a jierpetnal ollering, the young lad’s urge in him to 
.sacrifice, and longed to learn of him how to live a diaste and 
iiohie life, a life conformable with sanctity. Such was his 
will, and sucli had been his father’s wish ami command, 
and so it was as f hough God had ordained ii. I hough none 
in the cloister had marked it there seermd to lie ;i linrden 
laid on the shoulders of this pleasant and radiant lad, some 
secret inclinaiioii to atonement, iweii ihe ahhot did noi see 
it, although Gohlmund’s fatlu'r had liinted that it was so, 
telling him plainlv his wisli that his son slmtihl remain for 
ever ill the cloister. A hidden slain on Goldmumrs birth 
appeared to rajiiire its et£|)ialion. But the knight liad not 
pleaf.e.d the abbot, wlio answered with tfie lunootliest cour- 
r; 


tesy his cold, somewhat arrogant words, not heeding his 
suggestions overmuch. 

That other who had aroused Goldmund’s love saw 
sharper, and could perceive more of all this. But Narziss 
held back. He had felt well enough how clear a golden bird 
had flown to him. He, all alone in his fine being, had known 
himself akin to Goldmund, though in every outer thing the 
lad was his opposite. Narziss was dark and thin of face, and 
Goldmund open and radiant as a flower. Narziss was a 
thinker and anatomiser, Goldmund a dreamer and a child. 
Yet things common to both could bridge these differences. 
Both were knightly and delicate; both set apart by visible 
signs from their fellows, since both had received the par¬ 
ticular admonishment of fate. 

Narziss took an ardent share in this young soul whose 
ways and predestination were so well known to him; and 
Goldmund glowed with pleasure at the sight of his beau¬ 
teous, meditative teacher. But Goldmund was timid, and 
could think of no other way of pleasing Narziss than to 
wear himself out with industry as a skilful and patient 
scholar. More than his shyness held him back: his love of 
Narziss was checked by a feeling that this master was a 
danger to him. How could he take the good and saintly 
abbot for his ideal and at the same time love this subtle 
scholar, the learned, the penetrating Narziss ? 

Yet with all the strength of his youth he pursued these 
two incompatibles. Together they caused him great suffer¬ 
ing, and often, in the first months of his schooldays, Gold¬ 
mund felt such confusion in his heart, and his mind so torn 
this way and that, as to come into sore temptation to break 
from the cloister; or else, by fighting with his mates, still his 
inner need and quench his anger. For some small plaguing 
or saucy word this good, easy comrade would flame up, 
wild for no reason, so wrath that only with many struggles 
could he manage to rein in his ire, while, pale as death and 
i8 


with closed eyes, he turned from his tormentors in silence. 
Then he would run off to the mangers, seek out his pony 
Bless, lean up his cheek against his forehead, kiss him, and 
sob out his heart. This pain laid hold of him by inches, and 
at last was visible to all. His cheeks thinned, his eyes were 
often dull, the laugh in which all rejoiced grew ever rarer. 

He could not himself have said what he lacked. His 
deepest wish seemed this: that he should grow into a good, 
trusty scholar, soon to be received in the novitiate, and so 
live on to the end, as a quiet, devout brother of the cloister. 
He believed that his whole faculties and strength were 
centred in these simple, peaceful aims, and had no thought 
nor knowledge of other strivings. How strange and hard it 
.seemed to him, therefore, that even this, his fair and quiet 
purpose, should be so difficult of achievement. From time 
to time he would lose heart, as he found himself guilty of 
sinful longings, idleness at study, day-dreams, lazy fancies, 
or drowsiness as he sat in school; rebellious impatience with 
his Latin master and groundless quarrelling with his fellows. 
But what caused most turmoil in his soul was his know¬ 
ledge that his love of Abbot Daniel could never sort with 
his other longing for Narziss, though he was sure all the 
while that Narziss loved him, could feel with his pain, and 
would succour it. Far more than even Goldmund dreamed 
were Narziss’ thoughts engaged about him. He wished this 
fresh and lovely boy, his friend, could sense in him his oppo¬ 
site and completion, longed to see into his soul, lead him, and 
enlighten his mind, cherish him and bring him to blossom. 
Yet many reasons held him back, and of these almost all 
were known to him. Most was he impeded by his scorn of 
those many monks and .scholars in the cloisters who made 
favourites of their pupils and novices. Hef often enough, 
had felt with, repulsion the longing eyes of elder men upon 
him, had encountered often enough with dumb rejections 
their proffered friendship and caresses. Now he could 

19 


understand them better. He, too, could feel in him the urge 
to cherish and instruct the pretty Goldmund, evoking his 
clear, bright laughter, brushing his pale gold hair with 
tender fingers. But he would never do it. As a teaching- 
novice, invested with the dignity of a master, yet without a 
master’s office and authority, he was schooled to especial 
prudence and self-vigilance. He had kept such distance be¬ 
tween himself and scholars only a few years younger than 
he, as he might had he been twenty years their senior: al¬ 
ways he had checked most sternly any particular liking for 
a pupil, while with those who were naturally repugnant to 
him he had forced himself to particular care and justice. 
His was a service of the intellect, to which his rigid life was 
wholly dedicated, and only in his secret mind, at moments 
when his thoughts were the least guarded, had he given 
himself up to the vice of pride, of delight in his own know¬ 
ledge and keen wits. No - no matter how much any friend¬ 
ship with Goldmund might seem to offer him, such a bond 
could only be perilous: he must never let it touch the core 
of his life, fashioned to serve the spirit through the word; 
the life of a quiet and meditative guide, leading on his 
scholars, and not them only, to higher reaches of percep 
tion, oblivious of his own pleasure or pain. 

Goldmund had been a year or more at school. He had 
played many games with his fellows beneath the limes of the 
outer court and under the lovely chestnut by the gate; 
games of ball and games of robbers, and snowball fights. 
Now it was spring, yet Goldmund was dispirited and weary: 
his head often ached, and in school he found it very hard not 
to drowse, but to mark his lesson well. 

Then one evening Adolf -came up to him, that scholar 
with whom his first encounter had been a fight, and who, in 
the course of this winter, had begun to study Euclid at his 
side. It was in the hour after supper, a play-hour, when scho¬ 
lars played in their dormitories, gossiped together in the 
20 


schoolrooms and, if they chose, might walk in the outer 
courtyard. 

‘Goldmund,’ said Adolf, taking his arm and leading him 
down the cloister staircase, ‘I have something to tell you, 
something to make you laugh. You are a pattern scholar 
and must certainly want to be a bishop, so promise me truly 
before I tell it you that you’ll be a good companion and 
not breathe a word of it to the teachers.’ 

This Goldmund promised him at once. In Mariabronn 
there was honour among the scholars and honour between 
the monks that taught them, and at times these two came 
into conflict. But here, as in every other place, the unwritten 
law prevailed over the written, and never, since he became 
a scholar, had he broken the law and honour of his kind. 

Whispering, Adolf drew him on; out through the gate 
and under the lime trees. Out here, he said, was a band of 
good resolute companions, of whom he, Adolf, was the 
leader. They had taken from earlier generations the habit 
of remembering, little by little, that they themselves would 
never be monks, and so, for a night, would break their 
enclosure, going in secret into the village. This was a plea¬ 
sure and adventure which no good scholar should deny 
himself, and, in the thick of night, they would all creep back 
again. 

‘But then the gates will be locked,’said Goldmund. 

Of course the gates would be locked, but that was what 
gave salt to the escapade: there were secret ways by which 
the adventurers could return; it would not be the first time 
they had done it. 

Goldmund remembered a scholars’ saying: ‘To go out to 
the village’ - a word he had often heard them use. By this 
was meant the escape by nights of schoolboys to every sort 
of joy and adventure, and such transgression meant a 
sound whipping from the fathers. But.he knew well enough 
that among these resolutes of Mariabronn it was a point 


of honour to dare such consequence, and considered as a 
mark of high esteem to be asked to share in such transgres¬ 
sion. 

He would have answered ‘no,’ run back through the 
gates and to bed, he felt so sick and heavy at heart. That 
whole long day his head had ached. Yet now he felt abashed 
before Adolf. And who could tell? Perhaps out there there 
would be adventures, some new and beautiful thing to 
rouse him out of his dullness, the pain in his head and all his 
heaviness and sorrow. This was an escape into the world, 
furtive and forbidden, a little dishonest, and yet perhaps a 
release, a way to happiness. He stood there listening to 
Adolf, then suddenly laughed and answered ‘Yes.’ 

Unmarked he and Adolf crept out of sight, into the sha¬ 
dow of the limes on the wide courtyard, already dim, its 
outer gates already fastened. His comrade led him into the 
cloister mill, where, through the dusk, and muffled by the 
clamour of the wheel, it was easy enough to escape unheard, 
unseen. They clambered in through its windows onto a 
damp and slippery heap of planks, one of which they would 
have to draw out, and lay it across the stream to make them 
a bridge. Then they were outside the enclosure, standing 
together on a high road, that stretched off pale towards the 
twilight, into dark woods. All this was full of secrecy and 
excitement, and pleased Goldmund very much. 

A companion awaited them at the wood’s edge - Conrad; 
after long waiting another came hurrying to join them; the 
big Eberhard. The four trooped on through the woods, 
above them the cries of nightbirds; two stars glittering far 
off, wet and clear, between still clouds. Conrad gossiped 
and laughed, and at times the others laughed with him, 
yet none the less felt solemn and scared of the night, and 
their hearts thumped and thumped within them. 

On the far side of the wood, within a short hour, they 
reached a village. There all seemed to be asleep; the low 


white gables shimmered through the darkness, cross- 
hatched with dark ribs of timber. No lights anywhere. 
Adolf led them on past the silent houses; they climbed a 
wattle-fence and stood in a garden, their feet in the soft 
mould of beds, lurching down steps, and halting by the wall 
of a house, Adolf tapped at the shutter, waited and then 
tapped again: within- somebody stirred, and soon a beam of 
light shot through the chinks: the shutter opened and one by 
one they clambered through the window, into a kitchen, 
with sooty chimney and earthen floor. On the hob was a 
little oil lamp; up its thin wick climbed a weak flame. There 
stood a girl, a scraggy peasant, who held out her hand to the 
newcomers, while behind, out of the darkness, crept an¬ 
other, a young maid, with long, dark plaits. Adolf had 
brought them gifts; half a loaf of white, cloister bread, and 
sometliing wrapped in parchment, a handful of stolen in¬ 
cense, Goldmund thought, or wax from the altar tapers, or 
what not. The maid with the plaits stole back into the 
shadow, and went off, feeling her way, unlighted, to the 
door; was a long while gone, but returned with a grey 
stone pitcher, painted with blue flowers, which she gave to 
Conrad. He drank, and passed it to the others: all drank; 
it was a strong brew of cider. 

They sat together in the flicker of the tiny flame; the two 
maids on stiff little stools, and around them, on the earthen 
floor, the scholars, whispering and drinking cider, Adolf 
and Conrad leading their talk. From time to time one would 
rise and stroke the scraggy peasant’s neck and hair, whisper¬ 
ing secrets in her ears, though the maid with the plaits they 
never touched. Perhaps, Goldmund thought, the elder was 
the servant of the house, and the little, pretty one the daugh¬ 
ter. But that was all one to him, since he never meant to 
come back here again. Their secret creeping out of the mill, 
and stealing on through the dark wood, had been rare and 
fine, although not perilous. True it was all forbidden, and 

"" ^3 


22 



yet he could feel no remorse at breaking a rule. But this, he 
felt, this visiting maids by night, was sinful. Though it 
might mean nothing to the rest, to him, who would be a 
monk and live chaste, all commerce with maids was very 
evil. No, he would never come back here again! Yet his 
heart beat faster and faster in the flickering light of the poor 
kitchen. 

His comrades bragged to the two maids, striving to over¬ 
awe them with Latin tags, with which they adorned their 
speech. All three seemed in favour with the girls, to whom 
they crept closer and closer, with little sly love-words and 
fondlings, though the most they ever dared was a fearful 
kiss. They seemed to know to a hair what was permitted 
them; and, since their talk was all in whispers, the scene 
had in it something foolish, though Goldmund did not feel 
it to be so, He crouched very still on the floor, staring at 
the little flickering light, without a word for any of them. 
At times, with a kind of longing, he would peep round the 
corner of his eyes at the timid fondlings of the others. Then 
he would look out stiffly in front of his nose. But at heart 
he would fain have seen none of them, save only the little 
dark maid, though her especially he denied himself. Yet 
again and again his will forsook him as, when his eyes 
strayed back to the quiet sweetness of her face, he found hers 
fixed on him immovably. She sat and gazed, as if enchanted. 

Almost an hour slipped by - never had Goldmund known 
so long an hour- the scholars were at the end of their jokes 
and Latin; it grew quiet, and they sat a little uneasily. Eber- 
hard yawned The scraggy maid warned them it was time 
to go. All rose to their feet, all gave this serving-wench their 
hands, Goldmund the last. They reached out their hands to 
the little one, and again Goldmund was the last. Conrad 
led the way through the window, with Eberhard and Adolf 
after him: but when Goldmund made as if to follow he felt 
a hand on his shoulder draw him back. Yet he could not 
24 


stay. Only when he found himself in the garden did he 
linger, and not avert his eyes. Out through the window the 
maid with the dark plaits bent down to him. 

‘Goldmund,’ she whispered, and he stopped. 

‘Will you come back?’ she asked him. Her shy voice 
scarcely needed a breath. Goldmund shook his head. She 
stretched forth her arms and took it between her hands, and 
he felt her little palms warm on his temples. She bent far 
down, till her dark eyes were close to his. ‘Come back,’ she 
whispered, and her mouth touched his in a child’s kiss, 

He darted off through the little garden to the others, 
stumbling over beds, pricking his hand on a rose bush, 
clambered the wattle paling, ran through the village after his 
fellows. ‘Never again,’ his will commanded him: ‘Tomor¬ 
row! Tomorrow,’ sighed his heart. 

•No one surprised these nightbirds; darkness sheltered 
their return. They reached their cloister-wall, bridged the 
stream, and climbed into the mill, swung down under the 
lime trees into the courtyard, and so, by silent ways, over 
penthouse roofs, through double-columned windows, to 
their dormitory. 

Next morning the tall Eberhard slept so heavily that his 
room-mates had to rouse him with pillows. They were all 
in time for early mass, their morning broth, and so their 
schoolroom. But in school Goldmund was so pale that 
Father Martin asked if he were sick. Adolf warned him 

with a look, and he answered that he felt no pain. 

Towards noon, in the Greek school, the eyes of Narziss 
never left him. This master, too, could see that Goldmund 
was sick, but asked nothing, and only watched him very 
closely. When the lesson was done he called to him, and, 
to escape the eyes of other scholars, sent him with a message 
into the library. Thither he followed him. 

‘Goldmund,’ he said, ‘can I serve you? I see you are in 
some sort of need. Yoti are sick perhaps. If so we will put 
25 


N.G.-2 



you to bed, and order you sick man’s broth, and a cup of 
wine. You had no head for Greek today.’ 

He waited long for his answer. The pale boy looked up 
with puzzled eyes at him, hung his head, then raised it 
again, and strove with twitching lips to form a word. Strive 
as he might he could not answer. Suddenly, sideways, he 
sank down, leaning his forehead against a lectern, between 
two oaken faces of little angels, and broke into such a storm 
of weeping that Narziss, bewildered and ashamed, had for a 
while to turn away his face. Then he embraced the sob¬ 
bing lad, and raised him. 

‘Now! Now!’ he said, in a kinder voice than Goldmund 
till then had ever heard from him, ‘amice, weep as long as 
you will, and soon you will have wept out all your tears. 
So now - sit: you need not speak. I see you have had 
enough. Perhaps you have been striving all the morning to 
stand straight and let nobody mark you. Weep - it is the 
best you can do. Already dry, and able to stand up again? 
Come with me, then, to the sick-ward, and stretch yourself 
out, and tomorrow you will wake and be well again. Come, 
boy.’ 

He led him gendy to the sick-ward, avoiding the rooms of 
the scholars, placed him in a quiet cell, in one of the two 
empty beds, and when, in obedience, Goldmund was begin¬ 
ning to strip his clothes off, went out to call the brother 
physician, and tell him that the boy was sick. As he had 
promised he went to the refectory, where he ordered him a 
broth and a cordial; these Wo henefiem of the cloister were 
considered a great boon by those scholars whose sickness 
was not a very grave one. 

Goldmund lay in bed and strove to recover his wits. An 
hour ago he might have told himself clearly what it was that 
had tired him so that day, what fearful struggle in his heart 
had made his eyes so hot, and his head so empty. It was 
his mortal effort, again and again, with each new minute, to 
26 


forget the night he had passed outside the cloister ; or rather 
not the night itself, with its slippery climb across the mill- 
stream, its wild and glorious roamings in dark woods, its 
running here and there over hedges and ditches, through 
windows, down passages - but one instant of it: that instant 
only in the night when he had stood in the dark, at the 
kitchen window, feeling the maid’s breatli and hearing her 
words, touching her hand, and knowing her kiss on his 
lips. 

And now, to all this, was added another terror, with 
new knowledge. Narziss felt for him in his heart. Narziss 
loved him, and had him in his thoughts; he, the delicate and 
wise, the teacher with the fine, mocking lips. But Gold¬ 
mund had been foolish and wept before him, shamed, and 
unable to say a word; he had stood and sobbed before his 
eyes. Instead of doing as he had hoped, and subduing this 
learned man with the noblest weapons, with philosophy, 
Greek, feats of the spirit, and worthy stoicism, he had 
trembled and whimpered like a child. Never would he for¬ 
give himself that! Never again without shame could he 
look Narziss in the eyes. Yet, with his tears had gone the 
worst of his grief. This solitude, and the good bed, healed 
him; more than half the sting was drawn from his despair. 
Within the hour there came a lay brother with his broth, a 
piece of white bread, and a little cup of wine to go with it, 
such wine as scholars drank on feast-days. Goldmund ate 
and drank, and soon he had half-emptied his bowl, al¬ 
though, before it was done, he pushed it aside, and strove to 
think again. But he could not, so seized his bowl of broth, 
and ate it all up to the end. Later, when the door softly 
opened, and Narziss stole in to visit the sick scholar, Gold- 
rniind lay there asleep, and his cheeks were red again. Nar¬ 
ziss stood with curious eyes, staring quietly down, m a kind 
of envy. He saw; Goldmund was not sick; no need to send 
him wine next morning. Now the ban was lifted, and they 

^7 





could be friends. Today it was the boy who needed him, 
and so he had been able to do him service. Next time he 
perhaps would be the weak one, needing love, comfort, and 
help, and then from this scholar he would take diem, if ever 
it should come to such a pass. 


CHAPTER THREE 


It was a strange friendship that grew up between Narziss 
and Goldmund, one which pleased few, and, at times, al¬ 
most seemed to displease the friends. Narziss the thinker 
had at first to bear the heavier burden. To him all was 
thought, even love. In their love he was the guiding spirit, 
and, for long, only he of the two was conscious of the depths, 
scope, and meaning of their bond. For long, although he 
loved, he was alone, knowing that his friend could not in 
reality be his till he had led him into the knowledge of 
himself. Goldmund gave himself up to this new love with 
eager joy, playing unconsciously like a child. Narziss, 
responsible and conscious, accepted and pondered their high 
destiny. 

To Goldmund, Narziss brought relief and freedom. His 
first desire had been awakened by the sight and kiss of a 
pretty maid: all his longings to be cherished had been 
roused, and yet scared to desperation, and driven back. 
This had been his deepest fear: that everything he had 
dreamed till then of life, his hope and belief in his vocation, 
the future to which he felt predestined, had been imperfiled 
at its root by that kiss given at the window, and the sight of 
the maid’s dark eyes. Destined by his father to be a monk, 
and accepting the behest with his whole heart, aspiring with 
all the fire of his young ardour to the pious heroism of chas¬ 
tity, he had known, at this passing touch, this first call of 
life to his senses, that here was his enemy and demon; that 
women were his worst and constant temptation. 

Yet now fate had seemed to save him; now, at the height 





of his need, this friendship showed his longing a garden in 
flower, in which to erect new altars to his reverence. Here 
he might love without reproach, transmuting all the peri¬ 
lous fires of sense into clear, sacrificial flame. 

Yet even in tlieir earliest spring of friendship he encoun¬ 
tered strange, unlookcd for, impediments, sudden coldness, 
terrifying demands. It lay so far from his nature to see in his 
friend a contradiction and opposite. To him it seemed that 
only love was needed, only sincere and unconstrained devo¬ 
tion, to make one of two, and quench all differences, to 
build a bridge between all opposites. Yet how dour and cer¬ 
tain, clear and inexorable was this Narziss. To him the harm¬ 
less, natural gifts of love, a pleasant vagrancy together 
through the lands of friendship' and desire, seemed things 
unknown, or never sought. This joy in paths leading no¬ 
where, in, dreamy straying without a purpose, was one he 
refused, and would not tolerate. True that when Goklmiind 
was sick he had been troubled, that in matters of school and 
learning he helped and advised him on many points: he 
would construe difficult passages in books for him, open 
out new paths in the realms of grammar, logic, and philo¬ 
sophy; but never did he seem truly satisfied, and never at one 
with his friend. Often indeed he appeared to scorn him, and 
treat his words as a jest, 

And Goldmund felt that this was more than pedantry, 
more than an elder and wiser, showing his power; that 
something far deeper lay behind it. Yet what this deep thing 
was he could never fathom, and so friendship often made 
him restless and sad, In reality Narziss knew well enough 
how much there was of worth in Goldmund. Nor was he 
blind to the fresh delicate loveliness of the boy, his natural 
power and zest for life, ffietsap and promise of his youth. He 
was no pedant, to feed a fresh young soul with Greek, or 
answer innocent love with logic. Rather he cherished this 
yellow-haired boy too much, and that to him seemed a dan¬ 


ger, since love, for him, was not in the natural order, but a 
miracle. He must not, he felt, even satisfy his spirit with 
this freshness, never allow his affection to stray an instant 
into any pleasure of the senses. Since, if Goldmund fancied 
himself predestined to the life of a monk and an ascetic, a 
life-long striving after sanctity, Narziss was really framed 
for such a life, and only love at its highest was permitted 
him. Nor did Narziss believe that Goldmund had any voca¬ 
tion for the cloister. He, more than most, could read men’s 
souls, and here, in the soul of one he loved, he read with 
redoubled clarity and perception. He had seen into the 
depths of Goldmund’s nature, which he understood com¬ 
pletely, despite their difference, as the other, lost, half of 
his own. And he saw this nature heavily encased; set about 
with the boy’s own false imaginings, faults in his upbring¬ 
ing, things he must have heard his father say, and had long 
unravelled the whole simple secret of this young mind. 
His duty therefore was clear; to make known this 
secret to its bearer; to free his soul from its husk, restore 
this nature to itself. This would be hard, arid, worst 
of all, perhaps, he would have to lose his dearest friend by 
doing it. 

Slowly, with infinite care, he neared his goal. Months 
slipped away before any serious trial of his friend, any 
searching test, was essayed between them. So far, in spite 
of friendship, were they from each other, so taut the bow¬ 
string had been drawn. One of them saw, and one was 
blind, and so they went together, side by side. That the 
blind knew nothing of his blindness was a comfort only to 
himself. Narziss tried his first assault by attempting to dis¬ 
cover what experience had caused Goldraund’s weakness 
and tears, at the moment which drew them together. It was 
easier to unearth, than he had thought. Goldmund had for 
long felt the need to confess the happenings of that night, 
but for this he trusted none save Abbot Daniel, and the 


30 








abbot was not his confessor. When therefore Narziss, at a 
moment when it seemed to him good to do so, reminded his 
friend of the first occasion of their friendship, and gently 
touched on the causes of that grief, the boy answered with¬ 
out denials. 

1 wish you were a consecrated priest, and that so I could 
make my confession to you. I should be glad to free myself 
of a sin, and very willing to do my penance for it. Yet I 
cannot say it to my confessor.’ 

With caution Nharziss inquired more nearly; his path was 
found. 

‘Wm remember,’ he began, by way of trial, ‘that morn¬ 
ing when you .seemed to be sick. You cannot have forgotten, 
since that was the day which made us friends. It has often 
been in my mind. You perhaps may not have perceived it, 
hut f was very helpless that day.’ 

Wju helpless!’ aniiwered Goldmund, incredulous, ‘I was 
the helpless one. It was I that had to stand there sobbing, 
and striving to bring out a word, until at last I howled like 
a b;)b}c Oh ~ I am still ashamed when I think of it! I 
thought I should never be fit to show myself to you again. 

To think you ever saw me look so pitiful 1 ’ 

Narziss pressed him very cautiously. 

‘I can understand,’ he said, ‘that you felt ashamed by it. 
Such a fine brave fellow as you, and to stand there weeping 
before his friend - more, before his teacher. That was unlike 
you. But then I supposed you to be sick. When ague shakes 
him even Aristotle may say strange things. And yet all the 
time St was not sickness. Not even a fever. So that was why 
you were_so ashamed! Who feels any shame because he is 
shaken with a fever? You were ashamed because something 
W conquered you, because some enemy had you down! 

Wad anything unusual happened then?’ 

Goldinuiid did not answer him at once. Then he said 
sowy; Yes, it was something out of the common. Let 

32 


me suppose you my confessor. After all, I shall have to say 
it one day.’ 

With eyes cast down he told his friend the story of that 
night. Narziss answered with a smile: 

‘Well, it is forbidden “to go to the village”. But many 
forbidden things may be done by us, and yet we scarcely 
trouble to even think about them. Or else we confess and 
are absolved, and so become free of our guilt. Why should 
not you, like almost every scholar, join in such a small 
escapade? Is that so bad then?’ 

Goldmund grew angry, and poured out a torrent of 
words. 

‘In truth you talk to me like a pedant. You know quite 
well what happens “in the village”. Naturally I count it no 
great sin to break a few set rules of the cloister, and run 
out with a couple of schoolboys - though even that sorts ill 
with preparation for the life of a monk.’ 

‘Hold,’ exclaimed Narziss sharply, ‘do you not know, 
amice^ that for many of the greatest saints just such infringe¬ 
ments have been necessary? Have you not heard that one 
of the shortest ways to sanctity may be a life of carnal riot?’ 

‘Oh, enough,’ Goldmund defended himself. ‘I wanted to 
say that it was not any small infringement of rule that 
weighed me down that day, and caused me to weep. It was 
something else; it was the maid! It was a feeling which I 
could never make clear to you; a feeling that if I yielded to 
that temptation, if once I stretched out my hand to touch 
her, I should not be able to come back here, that hell would 
suck me in, like a swamp, and never let me go again. And 
I felt that then there would be the end of all fair dreams, all 
virtue, all love of God and His goodness.’ 

Narziss nodded very thoughtfully. 

‘The love of God,’ he said, weighing his words, ‘is not 
always one with our love of virtue. Oh, if it were only so 
easy ! We know the good, for it is written. But God is not 

33 




only in what is written, boy. His commandments are the 
•smallest part of Him. We may keep the commandments 
to the letter, and yet be very far from God. ’ 

‘But don’t you see what I mean ?’ Goldmund complained. 

‘Certainly I see. You feel that in women, in carnal 
love, there is contained all that you think of as “sin”, and 
“the world”. Of all other sins you suppose yourself in¬ 
capable, or, if you committed them, they would not weigh 
you down like this. They could all be confessed and atoned 
except this one sin.’ 

‘Yes, that is how I feel’ 

‘Well, you see, I can understand you: nor are you al¬ 
together wrong. The story of Eve and her serpent is cer¬ 
tainly not an idle tale. And yet, amice^ you are wrong. You 
would be right, perhaps, if you were Abbot Daniel, or a 
patron saint, like your St Chrysostom; or if you were a 
bishop or a priest, or even a simple little monk. But you are 
none of these. You are a young scholar, and even if it be 
your wish to stay for ever here in the cloister or if your 
father wished it in your stead, you have taken no vows as 
yet; you are not consecrated. If today or tomorrow you 
found yourself seduced by a pretty wench, and so gave way 
to her temptation, you would have broken no oath, and 
done no sacrilege.’ 

No written oath,’ cried Goldmund very hotly, ‘but one 
unwritten, and the holiest. The oath I have taken to mw 
seif. Can you not see that what may be valid for many others 
IS yet invalid for me.? Are you not you yourself still 
“consecrated? You took no oath to live chaste, and yet 
you would never touch a maid. Or am I deceived in you? 
Are you not truly what you seem? Are you not whatIthink 
yum Have not you too long since made a promise in your 
heart, although you never swore it openly, before your 
brothers and snperiorsf And do pu nor feci bound by it 

for e\w Are you not like me then?’ > ■ 


34 


‘No, Goldmund, I am not like you; or rather not as you 
imagine me. It is true that I have taken a silent oath. There 
you are right. But in no other way am I like you. Today I 
will say to you a thing which one day I believe you will re¬ 
member. It is this: our friendship has only one meaning, 
only one object - that I should show you how much you 
differ from your friend.’ 

Goldmund stood perplexed. The look in Narziss’ eyes, 
the tone in his voice, had been such that they could not be 
withstood. But why did Narziss say such words? Why 
should Narziss’ unspoken oath be more inviolable than his? 
Did he see in him only a child, to be teased and humoured? 
All the perplexities and sadness of their strange bond again 
assailed him. 

Narziss no longer doubted the nature of Goldmund’s 
secret. Eve, the eternal mother, lurked behind. But how 
had it ever come about that so joyous and beautiful a boy, so 
full of rising sap and nascent desire, should find in himself 
so bitter a resistance? Some demon must be at work in him, 
a hidden fiend to whom it was permitted to divide this noble 
being against itself, in the essence and primal urge by which 
it lived. Good then - this demon must be named, exorcised 
and made visible to all, and, when this was done, he could 
be conquered. 

Meanwhile Goldmund, more and more, was neglected 
and shunned by his companions: or rather, in a measure, it 
was they who felt him to be shunning and avoiding them. 
His friendship with Narziss pleased none of them. The 
evikongued, those who had themselves loved one of the 
friends, slandered it as a vice against nature. Yet even those 
who could see plainly that here there was no vice to be re¬ 
proved still shook their heads. None granted these two 
friends to one another. By this close friendship, it was said, 
they had set themselves apart from all the brotherhoods 
th e ir fellows were not good enough for these noblemen; their 

35 


spirit was against the community, was against the charity 
of the cloister, was unchristian. 

Rumours of the two, complaints and slanders against 
them, began to reach the ears of Abbot Daniel. In his forty 
years and more in the enclosure he had watched many 
friendships between young men. These had their place in 
the general life of the monastery, were sometimes a jest 
and sometimes perilous. He kept apart, watching them 
carefully, without any direct interference. Such warm exclu¬ 
sive friendship as this was rare, and certainly not without its 
danger. Yet, since he could not doubt its purity, he put 
no hindrance in its way. Had Narziss not been as he was, 
placed midway between the scholars and teaching monks, 
the abbot never would have hesitated to lay on him com¬ 
mands that should separate them. . It was bad for Goldmund 
that he, had ceased to mingle with his fellows, consorting: 
with an elder, and a teacher. But would it be just to prevent 
Narziss, the learned, the youth set apart and marked by 
intellect, Narziss acknowledged as his equal, nay superior, 
by every other teacher, from going the path which he had 
chosen; impede his mission to instruct? Had Narziss not 
taught as well as before, had his friendship led him into 
sloth, the abbot would have parted them at once. But noth¬ 
ing could be brought against him; only rumour, and the 
jealous mistrust of others. Moreover Daniel was aware of 
Narziss’ unexampled gift; his penetrating, strange, per¬ 
haps presumptuous, knowledge of men. Hie did not rate 
such faculties- too high: others would have pleased him 
better in Narziss. But he never doubted that this teacher 
had seen some especial virtue in ,his friend, and knew him 
better than any other. He himself had perceived in Gold¬ 
mund nothing unusual, besides his winsomeness and grace, 
save a certain eager,, almost owlish zeal in him, with which 
this mere young scholar, and guest of the cloister, already 
seemed to consider it his home, and himself a fully pro- 


I fessed monk. Nor did he fear any danger that Narziss 

I would spur on and encourage this touching but somewhat 

I callow zeal. What he dreaded most for Goldmund from his 

i friend was that Narziss might infect the lad’s spirit with a 

j certain learned pride and darkness of soul, although, for this 

I particular scholar, the danger did not seem so great that such 

I risk could not be incurred. No, he would not let mistrust 

I infect him, nor show himself unthankful that great souls 

I were sometimes given into his care. 

I Narziss pondered much on Goldmund. His faculty to 

I perceive and recognize the characters and desires of human 

I ! beings had long achieved its purpose with the other. Already 

I he had found what he sought. All this glow and fervour of 

j youth spoke clearly to him. Goldmund bore on him every 

i sign of a strong and highly gifted man, rich in his body and 

i . his mind; at least of a man with unusual power of love in 

; him whose desire and happiness lay in this: that his flame 

I was easily kindled, that he had in him the gift of self-forget¬ 

fulness. But why was this young being, formed for a lover, 
this youth of the delicate perception, he who could love, and 
rejoice so well and fully in the scent of a flower or morning 
sunshine, a horse, a flight of birds, a stave of music ~ why 
was he set so firmly in his wish to become a priest and an 
ascetic? 

Narziss pondered the matter long. He knew how Gold- 
mund’s father had encouraged this purpose in the boy. But 
could he have created the wish? What sorcery had he used 
upon his son to make him believe in such a vocation as his 
duty? And what kind of a man could this father be? Al¬ 
though purposely he had often turned their talk to him, 
and Goldmund had spoken of him frequently, Narziss had 
formed no clear image of this father: he could not see him. 

Was not that unusual and suspicious? When Goldmund 
told of the trout he had caught as a child, when he painted a 
butterfly in words, aped the cry of a bird, spoke of a comrade, 

37 ■ 



told of a dog or a beggar, their images arose, and could be 
seen. But when he spoke of his father there was nothing. 
No, if indeed the father had been so strong and powerful, 
so dominant over Goldmund’s early life, his friend would 
have described him far better, would have brought him to 
life with far more joy, Narziss did not esteem this father 
much: the knight displeased him, and at times he would 
even doubt if this could be Goldmund’s father after all. 
He was an empty idol. Yet whence had he derived such 
power.? How had he filled Goldmund’s. soul with dreams 
so foreign to the boy’s innermost being? 

Goldmund often thought of Narziss. Certain as he was of 
his friend’s deep love there remained the constant, irksome, 
suspicion that this friend was treating him as child. What 
did it mean that Narziss should for ever be telling him how 
unlike they were to one another? Meanwhile there was 
better to do than think, and this scholar had no taste for 
close thinking. There were many things to fill up the long 
bright days with. He would often hide with the brother- 
porter, since with him he felt quite at his ease, and from 
him would cajole permission to ride again on Bless, his 
pony. He was much beloved by the two laymen who dwelt 
in the cloister, the miller, and the miller’s boy. With these 
he chased otters in the mill-stream, or would bake a loaf of 
fine prelate’s bread with them, the scent of which Gold¬ 
mund could pick out with his eyes shut from every other 
kind of meal they used. Though still he spent long hours 
with Narziss there were many when he renewed old joys 
and habits. High Mass and vespers were a pleasure to him, 
it pleased him to sing in the scholars’ choir, he loved to say 
his rosary at a side altar, and listen to the solemn church 
Latin, watch, through an ineense-cloud, the gleam of orna¬ 
ments and chasubles, gaze up at the stiff and reverent images 
of.saints along the arches of the nave: the Evangelists, each 
with his beast, St James, with his pilgrim’s hat and staff. 


These images seemed to entice him: he rejoiced to feel, 
in their stone or wooden shapes, some secret understanding 
with his mind; to think them, after a fashion, the undying, 
all-seeing patrons, guides and protectors, of his life. So too 
he felt a kind of love, a hidden, deep attraction, to the pil¬ 
lars, the scrolls over windows and doorways, and every 
garnishing of the altars; to the fair and clear-cut garlands, 
stems, and branches, flowers, and clumps of growing leaves, 
which burst forth from the stone of every plinth, entwining 
so persistently and vividly. To him it seemed a deep and 
precious secret that here, outside Nature, her plants and 
beasts, there should be this dumb second life, devised by 
men, and men themselves in stone: men, beasts, and plants 
in stone and wood. Often he would pass a free hour in tak¬ 
ing copies of these devices; beasts, men’s faces, clusters of 
leaves; and at times would strive very hard to draw them 
again out of his head, or from real horses, flowers, and live 
men’s masks. 

He loved their songs in the cloister-church, especially the 
canticle to Mary: the sure, stern lilt of these chaunts, re¬ 
turning on itself again and again to praises and bursts of 
supplication. He could either follow their severest sense 
with his prayers or, careless of what the words might mean, 
heed only the stately measure of the music, allowing its vir¬ 
tue to sink into him, its long, deep notes drawn out in plan¬ 
gent, resonant supplication, with pious reassurances of love. 
In his innermost heart he did not love learning, had no 
taste in him for grammar and logic, although these also had 
their beauty; his soul was given to the image, and sound 
world of the litany. 

From time to time he would overcome his estrangement 
from his companions. It is sad and irksome to live long in 
the midst of coldness and despite, Again and again he made 
a sulky neighbour laugh in school, led on a silent room¬ 
mate to gossip at night in the dormitory, strove for an hour 

39 






together to gain love, and so win back a few eyes, faces, 
and hearts. Twice, much against his will, such proffered 
friendship was rewarded with the proposal that he should 
go ‘to the village’. Then he took fright, and again shrank 
back into himself, No, he would go no more ‘to the village’. 
He had managed at last to forget the dark-haired girl; never 
to think of her-or seldom. 



CHAPTER FOUR 


For long Goldmund’s secret remained proof against all 
the siege that Narziss laid against it. For long, or so it ap¬ 
peared, Narziss had striven in vain to give this hidden thing 
its voice and teach his scholar the word by which to van¬ 
quish it. Goldmund in their talks gave no clear picture of 
his home, of the life whence he had come into this cloister. 
He had told of a shadowy father, deeply respected but ill- 
defined, with a misty tale of a mother, long dead and 
vanished, who remained as a pale name and nothing more. 

Narziss, the skilled reader of other men, had come by 
degrees to see in Goldmund one of those who have had to 
lose a part of their lives; who, forced by some need or sorcery 
in themselves, cannot think of certain matters in their past. 
He saw he would.gain nothing by teaching or questioning, 
saw he had trusted too much in the power of reason, and 
spoken many vain and useless words. 

But his love of Goldmund had not been vain, nor their 
custom of being much together. In spite of the depths that 
sundered them each had learned much from the other’s 
company. Between them, beside the language of reason, 
there had slowly come into being another tongue; a speech 
of signs and of the soul; as, between two dwellings, though 
there be a high road for waggoners, on which litters pass, 
and riders may jog from place to place, there are also set 
around it many lanes, field-tracks running in and out, hid¬ 
den paths on which children play, walks tinder trees for 
lovers, the half-seen trails of cats and dogs. By degrees Gold¬ 
mund’s magic power of speaking his mind in images had 
found ways into the thoughts of his friend, creeping into 
41 ^ 




all they said together: so that Narziss, without aid of words, 
learned to feel for himself and to define much of Gold- 
mund’s nature and perceptions. Slowly, in the light of these, 
a bridge of love was built from soul to soul, and words 
could find a way along it. So that at last, when neither was 
expecting it, as they sat on a feast-day in the library, there 
arose a talk which led them on to the very heart and mean¬ 
ing of their friendship, and illumined its whole future 
course. 

They had sat discussing astrology, a forbidden science, 
and not pursued in the cloister. Narziss had said that it was 
a striving to order and arrange after their kinds the many 
divers sorts of human beings, their predestined character 
and their fates, Here Goldmund broke into his words. 

‘You speak of nothing but differences! I have slowly be¬ 
gun to see that they form your own particular whimsey. 
When you speak of this great difference between us I al¬ 
ways feel that it lies in nothing, save in your own strange 
hankering to find differences.’ 

Narziss: ‘Right. You have hit the nail on the head. That 
is what I mean - that to you differences mean little, while 
to me they are the most important things. Mine is the nature 
of a scholar, and my branch of scholarship is science. And 
science, to quote your own words, is nothing else than a 
“strange hankering after differences”. Her essence could 
not be better defined. For men of science nothing is so im¬ 
portant, as the clear definition of differences. To find, for 
instance, on every man, those signs which mark him off 
from all other men .: that is to know him.’ 

Goldmund : ‘But how? One has peasant’s shoes and is a 
peasant; another aferown on his head, and is a king. There 
arc your differences ! But these are seen by children, without 
, any science.’ 

Narziss; ‘Yet when peasant and king are clad alike chil¬ 
dren can no longer distinguish between them.’ 


Goldmund:.‘No more can science.’ 

Narziss: ‘Perhaps it can. I admit that science is not any 
cleverer than a child: but she is more patient. She works 
more nearly, and sees more than the coarsest of differ¬ 
ences.’ 

Goldmund: ‘And so does every clever child. He could 
know a king from his look and bearing. But to be plain; 
you fine scholars are proud, and you always think us duller 
than yourselves. We can sharpen our wits without science.’ 

Narziss: ‘I am glad to see you have noticed that. Soon 
you will have noticed, too, that I do not mean skill or cun¬ 
ning when I speak of differences between us. I do not say: 
“Your wits are sharper, or you are better or worse than 
I.” 1 only say: “You are not I”.’ 

Goldmund: ‘That’s easily understood. But you do more 
than speak to me of differences in outward signs; you speak 
of a difference in fate and predestination. Why, for example, 
should your destiny be other than mine? You, like me, are 
a Christian; we arc both resolved to live as monks. And you, 
like me, are the child of our good Father who is in heaven. 
Our goal is the same - eternal happiness; our resolves the 
same-to return to God.’ 

Narziss: ‘Very good. It is true that in books of dogma 
one man is the same as any other. But not in life. I think 
that the Redeemer’s beloved disciple who laid his head upon 
His breast, and that other disciple who betrayed Him, had 
not both been framed for the same destiny.’ 

Goldmund: ‘You are a sophist, Narziss. Along such 
paths we shall never come together, you and L’ 

Narziss: ‘There is no path by which we can come to¬ 
gether, Goldmund.’ 

Goldmund:‘Don’tspeak so, Narziss,’ 

Narziss; ‘It is my earnest. It is not our task to come to¬ 
gether; as little as it would be the task of sun and moon, 
of sea and land. We two, my friend, are sun and moon; sea 

'43 . 


and land. Our destiny is not to become one. It is to behold | 

each other for what we are, each perceiving and honouring | 

it in his opposite; each finding his fulfilment and comple- j 
tion.’ |: 

Goldmund hung down his head, discomfited: his face j 
had grown sad. At last he answered: | 

‘Is that why you so often mock my thoughts?’ | 

Narziss delayed with his reply. Then, in a clear, hard i 
voice, he said: , | 

‘Yes, that is why. And you must learn to bear with me, j 
dear Goldmund, for not taking your thoughts more | 

seriously. Believe me I mark and study your every accent, 
and all your gestures, each smile that comes into your face. | 
All that in you seems essential and necessary is real to me. |, 

Why therefore should I give your thoughts the place of I 

honour in my mind - you, who have so many other gifts ? ’ I 

Goldmund smiled sadly: ‘I said you always think of me | 

as a child.’ .. | 

But Narziss was still inflexible; ‘Some of your thoughts j 
seem to me the thoughts of a child. Yet remember what we j 
said a while ago; that a sharp-witted child need never be f 

stupider than a scholar, It is only when children speak of j 

science that scholars need not take them seriously.’ i 

Goldmund became impatient:‘But when I do not speak I 

of science you mock me! You speak as though all my piety, ’■ 

and wish to make progress in my studies, and my longing i 
to be a monk, were so much babbling.* ' 

Narziss eyed him very gravely: ‘When you are truly 
Goldmund you do not babble. But you are not always Gold- | 
mund. I long for nothing so much as to have you Goldmund [ 

through arid through. You are no monk - no scholar. j 

Scholars and monks may both be hewn of coarser wood. j 

You fancy you are not learned enough for me, have too little | 

logic, and are not pious enough. None of all these. Only - I 

you are not enough yourself.’ | 

44 ! 


Though here in their talk Goldmund, in perplexity, left 
his friend, with anger against him in his heart, not many 
days had passed before he himself wished to continue. And 
this time Narziss succeeded in showing him, in a clear, 
vivid image, such as he himSelf would use and accept, the 
true difference in their natures. 

Narziss had talked himself hoarse: yet today, he felt, 
Goldmund had heard him more willingly, had let his words 
sink deeper into his soul, and already he began to have 
power on him. His success made him yield to the tempta¬ 
tion to say even more than he had intended: he let his elo¬ 
quence bear him onwards. 

‘Listen,’ he said, ‘I am only your superior in this: I am 
awake, whereas you are only half-awake, and at times your 
whole life is a dream. I call that man awake who, with con¬ 
scious knowledge and understanding, can perceive the deep, 
unreasoning powers in his soul, his whole innermost 
strength, desire, and weakness, and knows how to reckon 
with himself. The task that brings us together, the whole 
aim and purpose of our friendship, is that you should learn 
from me how to do it. In you, Goldmund, nature and in¬ 
tellect, consciousness and the world of dreams, are set very 
far from one another. You have forgotten your childhood, 
which still strives up from the depths of your being, to pos¬ 
sess you. It will always make you suffer till you heed it. But 
enough: awake, as I said, I am your superior. There I am 
stronger than you, and so lean help you.- But in all things 
else, amice,-jou are mine, or rather you will be so when 
you know yourself.’ 

Goldmund had listened keenly till the words ‘You have 
forgotten your childhood.’ On these he started and flinched, 
as though an arrow had pierced his body, though this was 
not perceived by Narziss, who spoke, as he often did, with 
half-shut eyes, or staring far away into the distance, as 
though, if he did not see, the words came easier. He had not 

45 






observed how Goldmund’s lips were shaking, nor how his 
face had begun to pale. 

‘Your superior - I?’ stammered Goldmund; but only to 
have something to answer: it was as if his whole body had 
been lamed. 

‘To be sure,’ Narziss concluded. ‘Men of dreams, the 
lovers and the poets, are better in most things than the men 
of my sort; the men of intellect. You take your being from 
your nwthers. You live to the full: it is given you to love 
with your whole strength, to know and taste the whole of 
life. We thinkers, though often we seem to rule you, can¬ 
not live with half your joy and full reality. Ours is a thin 
and arid life, but the fullness of being is yours; yours the 
sap of the fruit, the garden of lovers, the joyous pleasaunces 
of beauty. Your home is the earth, ours the idea of it. Your 
danger is to be drowned in the world of sense, ours to gasp 
for breath in airless space. You are a poet, I a thinker. You 
sleep on your mother’s, breast, I watch in the wilderness. 
On me there shines the sun; on you the moon with all the 
stars. Your dreams are all of girls, mine of boys 

Goldmund had heard him open-eyed, and Narziss spoke 
with a kind of oratorical self-abandonment. Many of his 
words, like blades, had entered the heart of his friend. In 
the end the boy turned pale and closed his eyes, and when 
Narziss saw, and rose in sudden fear, Goldmund, white as 
death, could only whisper: 

‘Once I broke into sobs and wept before you; you 
remember. That must never happen again. I should never 
forgive myself, or forgive you either. Quick now, leave 
raei Let me alone! You have said some terrible words to 

me.’ . _ 

Narziss was sick at heart. His thoughts had borne him 
away, since he felt that he spoke better than usual. Yet now 
he perceived, in consternation, that something in what he 
had just said had struck his friend a deathly blow; that in 


some way he had pierced to the quick of him. He found it 
hard to leave him at such a time, and so, for an instant, he 
lingered on, till the frown on Goldraund’s forehead warned 
him. Then he went off in great confusion, leaving his friend 
in the solitude he needed. Though Goldmund wept, his 
tears were not enough to release the pent-up grief in his 
soul. In the agony of the deepest wound, and no hope at all 
of ever healing it - as if his friend had suddenly knifed him 
to the heart - he stood alone, panting heavily: his breath 
constricted as though by death, his face waxen, his hands 
limp at his sides. This was the old pain, only sharper; the 
old confusion in his spirit, the feeling that he must look on 
something horrible, something, it might be, too fearful to 
bear. And now there was no sobbing storm of tears to ease 
the anguish in his mind. Holy Mother of God, what was it 
then? Had something happened? Had he been struck to 
death? Had he killed a man? What terrible thing had they 
been saying? 

He gasped like one that has drunk poison, was filled to 
bursting with the thought that now he must shake free of 
something deadly, some barb, stuck in his heart. He 
stumbled from the room, flinging his arras out like a swim¬ 
mer, wandered, without knowing it himself, into the stillest, 
emptiest part of the enclosure, along corridors, down steps, 
into the air. He had come to the inner heart of the monas¬ 
tery, the central cloister; in the cool light a sweetness of 
roses lay on the warm air, chilled by stone. 

Narziss in that hour had done unwittingly what for long 
it had been his conscious wish to do: he had named and 
exorcised the demon inhabiting his friend. Some one or 
other of his words had stirred a secret in Goldmund’s breast, 
and his demon had reared up in agony. For long Narziss 
strayed through the schoolrooms, seeking his friend, but 
found him nowhere. 

Goldmund stood in the shadow of the arches that open 






onto the little cloister garden: from the pillar above three 
heads of beasts peered down on him, three stone heads of 
dogs or wolves, and leered. His pain raged through his 
mind, finding no way to light, no way to reason. A shudder, 
as of death, clipped at his gullet: he looked up, not know¬ 
ing what he did, at one of the capitals, saw over him the 
three heads of beasts, and at once it seemed that three wild 
heads crouched, grinning and howling, in his entrails. i- 

‘Now I must die at once,’ he knew with a shudder. And i' 

then, shaking with his fear: ‘Or else go mad, and so these | 

beasts will devour me.’ . !• 

Twitching and shuddering he sank down, huddled at the ^ 

foot of the column; his pain too great, he had reached its l' 

uttermost limit. His face sank between his hands, to his I 

mind came the darkness that he craved. I 

Abbot Daniel had had a bad day. Two of the elder monks | 
had come before him, peevish, chiding, slandering one an- i 
other to him, their father; complaining of some old, trivial, 
rankling difference, born of their spleen, which now, again, " 
had roused them both to bitter strife. He had listened, ; 
though all too long, to their bickerings, admonished them, I 
as he feared without success, and in the end sent them 1 

sternly away, each with his somewhat heavy penance. Then, j 

worn out, he had gone down to pray in the nave, had said t 
his prayer, and stood up unrefreshed, and so wandered 
forth to the inner cloister, led on by itS' faint scent of roses, . 
to stand a minute snuffing in the air, i 

He came upon the scholar, Goldmund, stretched out there I 
senseless on the flags, gazed down in horror and astonish- \ 

ment at his deathly quiet, the pallor of his cheeks, whose \ 

young body was, as a rule, so full of life. Today had surely ' j; 
been an evil one. And now this, to add to it all! He tried i; 
to raise the boy, but found himself too feeble for such a load. i 

Then, sighing deeply, he went off, to call for two of the ! 

younger brothers to take him up, and carry him to the sick- 


ward, sent for Father Anselm, the leech, and lastly for Nar- 
ziss to come before him, who soon was found, and did his 
bidding, 

‘You know already ? ’ he asked him. 

‘Of Goldmund? Yes, father. They told me he was 
sick, or had injured himself, and I saw them carry him 
along.’ 

‘Yes, I found him in a swoon, lying where he had no 
leave to be, in the inner cloister; and he is not injured, al¬ 
though unconscious. This does not please me. And I feel 
that you have a share in it, or at least that you must know 
how it came about. It was for that I sent for you. Speak.’ 

Narziss, as cold as ever in speech and bearing, gave a 
short account of what he had said to Goldmund, and how 
some unlooked-for power had wrought its effect in him. The 
abbot shook his head, displeased. 

‘That was strange talk,’ he said, and forced his words to 
be calm. ‘You have just described such a talk as might be 
called an attack on another soul. It is, I might even say, the 
onslaught of a superior, a confessor. But you are not Gold- 
mund’s confessor: you are not confessor to any; you are 
not consecrated! How comes it then that you permit your¬ 
self to talk with this scholar as though you had spiritual 
warrant to instruct him of things which only a confessor 
has power in? As you see, the issue has been evil.’ 

Narziss answered softly but steadily: 

‘It is still too early, fatiier, to judge the issue. I was some¬ 
what startled by the violent effect of what I said, but I do 
not doubt that the issue of my talk with Goldmund will be 
to heal him,’ 

‘That is to be seen. It was not that I sent for you to speak 
of, but your own action. What impelled you to say such 
things to this scholar?’ 

‘He is my friend, as you know. I bear him a particular 
love, and feel I understand him very well. You tell me I 

49 


K.Q.-i 



spoke to him like a confessor. I only did so because I felt I 
know him better than he himself.’ 

The abbot shrugged: 

‘I know you have particular gifts Let us hope you have 
done no lasting harm with them. Is Goldmund sick? Had 
he a fever? Had his nights been restless, or had he not been 
eating enough? Was there any pain in his body?’ 

‘No, till today his body has been in health.’ 

‘And otherwise?’ 

‘His soul was ailing, father. You know he has long 
reached the age when men begin to struggle with carnal 
longing.’ 

‘I know. He is seventeen.’ 

‘Eighteen, father.’ 

‘Eighteen. Well, late enough, then. But these are merely 
natural struggles, which every man encounters in his life. 
They would not be enough to make you call him sick in 
soul.’ 

‘No, holy father, in themselves they would not be enough. 
But Goldmund’s soul was sick already, had long been so, 
and, therefore, for him, such struggles are more dangerous 
than for others. I think that he is suffering now because he 
has forgotten .some of his past’ 

‘Indeed. Which part of it, then ? ’ . „ 

‘His mother, and all that went along with her. I know 
no more of her than he. I only know that with her must lie.. 
some of his grief. He seems to know nothing of his mother; 
only that he lost her early, and yet he makes me feel he is 
ashamed of her, though from her he must have inherited 
most of his talents, since nothing of what he tells me of his . 
father ever shows me that father as the man to beget such a : 
fair and goodly son. None of what I tell you is hearsay,; 
father, I draw my own conclusions from certain signs.’ 

These last words set the abbot thinking. At first Narziss 
had seemed to him foolish, and arrogant^ he had even 
50 


smiled a little as he listened. Now, he thought of Gold- 
mund’s father, the knight with the wizened face and trick¬ 
ing speech, and remembered, as he searched his mind, some 
words he had said of the boy’s mother. She had shamed him, 
he declared, and run from him; in his son’s mind he had 
striven to wipe out all memory of the vices which might 
be her legacy. And in this, said the knight, he had suc¬ 
ceeded, and his son was ready to give himself to God, to 
expiate the sins of his mother’s life. 

Never before had the abbot been so little pleased with 
Narziss. And yet, how this thinker had hit the mark; how 
well he seemed to know his friend! He began to question 
him further, of all that had happened in their talk. 

‘It never was my intention to rouse in Goldmund the 
heavy grief and pain that assail him. I reminded him that 
he did not know himself, and said he had forgotten his 
mother, his childhood. Something in my words must have 
pierced his spirit, forcing its way down into the darkness in 
him, with which I had been struggling so long. He was 
as though beside himself: he stared at me as if he no longer 
knew me, as if he had forgotten his own name. I had 
often said to him that he slept, and had never in all his life 
been wideawake. Now he is awake, there can be no doubt 


of it.’ 

Here he was dismissed, without a penance, though with 
the command not to see his friend at present. 

Father Anselm had had them lay the boy in bed, and now 
sat by his side to watch him. It seemed to him best to use no 
powerful means for bringing Goldmund to his senses^ who 
looked as white as death, the old man thought, peering down, 
out of kind, wrinkled eyes. He felt the pulse, and laid his 
hand on the heart. This lad, he said to himself,, must be 


gorged with some monstrous dainty, a bunch of wood-sorrel, 
or some such thias^etfflM^dl^te^ 


at his tongue. TAlEQAO • 00k ^ 

Donation 

jlaa© of Dofloul. 






Anselm was fond of Goldmund, though he never could 
abide his friend, Narziss, that puffed-up novice, too young 
to have ever been made a teacher. There was the mischief! 
That Narziss must have some share in this silly mishap. 
What need had such a fresh and pleasant scholar, natural 
and open of heart, to consort with that arrogant pedant, so 
vain of his Greek that it seemed to him the only thing in 
the world! 

When, long after this, the abbot opened the door of the 
sick ward, he found old Pater Anselm still peering anxiously. 
What a young, pretty, guileless face: yet all he could do was 
to sit and study it, longing to bring it back to life, yet unable 
to give any aid. To be sure the lad might have the colic; 
he would prescribe him rhubarb and a cordial. But the 
longer he watched those sallow, distorted features, the more 
suspicious grew Pater Anselm. He had had his experience! 
Several times in his long life he had been with those po.S' 
.sessed by devils. He hesitated, even to himself, to formulate 
the whole of his thought: he must wait and examine before 
he spoke. But, he reflected grimly, if this poor lad is struck 
down and bewitched, we shall not have far to seek for the 
culprit: and he shall answer it in full! 

The abbot came to the bed, bent gendy down over the 
boy, and drew back one of his eyelids. 

‘Can you rouse him ?’he asked. 

I would rather wait a little longer, His heart is sound. 
Nobody mu.st approach him.’ 

:‘Is he in danger of death!” , , 

I do not think so. No wounds on his body, or trace of 
any blow or fall. He has only swooned. Perhaps it is the 
colic. Great pain will often rob us of our senses. If he had 
b^n poisoned there would be fever. No, he will come to 
himself and live again.’ , .: .: 

‘Might it not have come from his mind?’ , ' 

‘I would not say no. Is nothing known of it all? Some 


one may have caused him to take fright: some news of a 
death, or an insult and a violent quarrel. Then it would all 
be clear.’ 

‘We know nothing. Have a care that none be let in to 
him. I beg you not to leave him till he wakes, father; and 
if he seems in danger call me, even in the middle of the 
night.’ 

Before he left the old abbot bent again over the boy. He 
thought of the knight, his father, and the day when Ais 
pretty little yellow-head had been left here for schooling 
in the cloister, where they all took to him at once. He too 
had been glad to see him come. But in one thing Narziss 
had hit the mark: in no way did this boy resemble his 
father. Alas, how much grief there was in the world! How 
vain and useless all our strivings! Had he neglected the care 
of this poor boy ? Had he even given him the right confessor ? 
Was it in order that, in their house, no other should know 
this scholar so well as Narziss? Could Narziss help him - 
a novice; neither monk nor consecrated priest? Pie, whose 
thoughts and opinions seemed all so arrogant, so full, almost, 
of hate? And God alone knew if this Narziss had not him¬ 
self long been mishandled: God alone could tell if all his 
obedience were not a mask, if at heart he were not a mere 
heathen. He, Ae abbot, would have to answer for every- 
Aing that might one day come to Aese two young men. 

When Goldmund woke it was dark. His head swam, no 
thoughts came into it. He could feel himself lying on a bed, 
but where he knew not. He strove, and yet nothing came to 
him. How had he travelled here: from what strange coun¬ 
try of new knowledge? He had been in some far-off place, 
where he had seen some rare and glorious sights, terrible, 
and never to be forgotten. Yet now he was forgetting them 
all. When was it? What was Ais thing that had risen up 
before him, so dolorous, mighty, full of beauty, to fade out 
again? He strove to sec far down into himself, to Ae deeps 

53 





out of which this thing had come. What had it been? A 
covey of vain images swirled around him. He could see 
beasts’ heads, three heads of dogs, and caught a whiff of 
roses in his nostrils. What pain he had felt! He shut his eyes. 

The terrible pain I He fell asleep. 

Then he woke and saw the thing he sought, through a 
swiftly melting fog of dreams: saw the image, and hunched 
himself together in a pang of agony and joy. He could see - 
his eyes had been opened - the tall, shining woman, with 
full, red lips, her hair blown by the wind: his mother! And 
in that instant he heard a voice, or seemed to hear it, speak 
these words: ‘You have forgotten your childhood.’ He 
listened, thought; then remembered. Narziss’ voice. Nan 
ziss! In a flash it was all before his eyes, he could see it 
all, it was all known. Oh, mother - mother ! Mountains of 
rubbish had been levelled, oceans of forgetfulness dried up: 
from blue, shining eyes, like a queen, the lost woman smiled 
at him again, her image unutterably loved. , 

Pater Anselm, who had fallen asleep in his chair, beside |; 
the bed, awoke. He had heard the sick boy stir and draw in ^ 

a breath. Gently he rose: ‘Who’s there ? ’ asked Goldmund, | 

‘Don’t be scared. It’s I ~ Father Anselm. I’ll strike a | 
light.’ 1 

He set a flame to the wick; it lighted up his kind puckered \ 

face. i 

‘But am I sick?’questioned the boy. !. 

‘You fell into a .swoon, sonny. Give me your hand, and ; 
let me take your pulse. How do you feel yourself?’ •. j 

‘Well, thanks, Pater Anselm. You are very kind to me. I j 
need nothing? I am only weary.’ _ j 

‘To be sure you are weary. Soon you’ll drop off again. i 
Take a mouthful of spiced wine first, though. Here it is, j 

all ready waiting for you< We’ll empty a glass together for r 

friendship’s sake, lad,’ . . i 

He had ready his pitcher of cordial, and the water boiled | 

■ 54 1 


to go with it. ‘You and I have both slept sound this long 
while,’ chuckled the leech. ‘You’ll say I’m a fine surgeon 
to watch the sick, and too old to keep awake to do it. Well 
there - we’re all of us human. And now let’s drink this 
magic draught together. There’s nothing so goed as a tipple 
together in the night. Good health to you.’ 

Goldmund laughed, clinked cups, and drank with him. 
This hot cordial was spiced with cloves and gilliflowers, 
and sweetened with fine sugar-beet: he had never known so 
good a drink. 

He remembered how once before he had ken sick, and 
then Narziss had taken care of him: now it was Pater 
Anselm, and he was very gentle and kind. It made liim 
laugh, it was all so fine and pleasant, to lie there in the night 
by lamplight and empty a cup ofwinewith the old physician. 
‘Have you a bellyache?’ said the father. 

‘No.’ 

‘And I who said you must have the colic! That’s nothing, 
then. Put your tongue out. Well, once again, old Anselm 
has shown himself a fool! Tomorrow you’ll stay warm in 
your bed, and I’ll come along and take a look at you. Plave 
you finished your wine? Good may it do you! Let’s see, 
there may be a drop more of it. Well, if we share and share 
alike there’ll be another half-cup for each of us. You scared 
us all finely, Goldmund. You lay out in the cloister like a 
corpse. Are you certain, now, you haven’t a bellyache?’ 

They laughed, and shared the dregs of sick man’s wine; 
from eyes that were clear and tranquil Goldmund looked 
up, happily and merrily. The old man went off to bed. Gold¬ 
mund lay awake a while longer. Visions rose up slowly 
again in him, again there came to life in his soul the radiant, 
yellow-haired image of his mother. Her presence filled him 
through and through, like the sweet breeze blown across a 
hayfield; a breath of warmth, of life, tenderness, courage. 
Oh, mother, how could I ever have forgotten you? 



CHAPTER FIVE 


Till now, though Goldmvirid had always known some" 
thing of his mother, it had only been through other folks’ 
stories. Her image had faded from his mind and, of the 
little which he believed himself to know cjf her, he had 
always kept something hidden from Narziss. ‘Mother’ had 
become a tliought of which it was foiiridden him to speak. 
Once she had been a dancing woman, liad been beautiful 
and wild, noble, but of bad and heathenish kindred. Gold- 
miind’s father, or .so lie toki hi;; son, had raised .lier up 
from poverty and .shame. .Since he could not be sure she 
wa.s, a Chri.stian he htid had licr baptized and in.structed in 
her faith;,had married her, and made her ;i great lady. But 
she, after a few yeans of ,submi.s.sion to him, and ordered life, 
had returned to her old arts and jiraciices, arousing dissen- 
.sions, and tempting men; .strayed from her home for days 
and weeks together, gained the ilkrepute of a witch, and, 
at last, gone her way.s for evermore, tliough her husband had 
many times pardoned her, and taken her back into his 
favour, i 

For some while longer her fame had lived, like an evil 
fire, flickering in the trail of a comet, till that too had died, 
leaving no trace. Slowly her goodman had recovered from 
years of terror and mistrust, shame, and ever-fresh surprises. 
And, in place of his evil wife, he had loved this son, very 
like his mother in face and bearing. The knight had grown 
grizzled and penitent, instilling into Goldmund, the belief 
that now he must offer himself up, in expiation for his 
mother. 



Thus Goldmund’s father would talk of his lost woman, 
although he was not easily brought to speak of her; and 
when he delivered Goldmund at the cloister he had given 
the abbot certain hints of it. His son had known it all, but 
only as a mean and evil tale, which he must put for ever 
from his mind; strive with all his might to forget. 

But what indeed was lost and forgotten was his own true 
memory of his mother; that other, different mother, in his 
soul, not built of the sayings of the knight, or the dark, wild 
rumours of serving-men. This reality, seen by his heart, 
had soon been forgotten; yet now her image, the star of his 
babyhood, arose in him. 

‘I cannot tell how ever I managed to forget her,’ he cried 
one day to his friend. ‘Never in all my life have I loved 
as I loved her, with a love so glowing, and iinwithheld. 
And never have I honoured another like her, or thought any 
other so beautiful. To me she is the sun and moon. God 
knows how it ever should have been possible to dim this 
shining love of her in my mind, and so make of her at last 
the evil, pale, formless witch she became for me, and was to 
my father for many years.’ 

A short while since, Narziss had ended the novitiate, and 
would soon be a clothed and consecrated priest. His bearing 
towards his friend had changed, though Goldmund, who, 
before his swoon, would chafe at Narziss’ questions and 
admonishments, as irksome pedantry and arrogance, now, 
since his pain had brought back memory, was full of ever- 
wondering gratitude for the skill and wisdom of his teacher. 
How deeply had this uncanny scholar read in him: how 
exactly probed his hidden sore! And then, how cunningly 
healed it! Not only had his swoon left no trace, but some¬ 
thing seemed to have melted out of his nature; some vain, 
owlish, longing to be a saint, a certain solemn, over-devout 
frivolity; his belief that it was his bounden duty to be more 
of a monk than monks themselves. Goldmund seemed both 





older and younger since the day on which he discovered his 
true self. And for all this he had to thank Narziss. 

But now Narziss, for some short time, had been very 
prudent with hi,s friend. He watched him humbly, no longer 
as his teacher and superior, though he had gained a very 
willing disciple. But he saw Goldmund endowed from a 
hidden source with gifts for ever denied him. It had been 
granted him to foster their growth, yet he himself would 
have no share in them. He rejoiced to see his friend made 
whole and free, and yet in his joy there was some sadness. 
He felt himself a husk, to be sloughed aside: a surmounted 
rung on the ladder of perfection; could see the near con¬ 
clusion of their bond, which had brought such gladness to 
his heart. And he still knew Goldmund better than the boy 
himself, who now,, though he had found his soul again, and 
was ready to follow where it would lead him, could not tell 
as yet which way it might beckon. But Narziss had perceived 
that his friend’s path led through lands he himself could 
never travel in. 

Goldmund was less eager for learning; his itch for dis¬ 
putation had left him utterly. Now, in all their talks, he 
would speak with .shame of many of his former arguments. 

In the meantime, since he had ceased to be a novice, or 
else because of what he had done to Goldmund, these last 
days had roused in Narziss a need for retirement and self- 
questioning, askesis, and devotional exercise; the urge to 
fast much, and say long prayers, often confess, and lay 
voluntary penance on himself. Goldmund tried hard to 
share these inclinations, Since his cure all his instincts had 
been sharpened. Though as yet he had not any, inkling of 
what the future might have in store, he could feel every day 
more clearly, and sometimes with terror in his heart, that 
now his real destiny was upon him, a time of respite and 
innocence at an end, and the life in him rose to meet its fate. 
The omens at times seemed full of happiness, keeping him 

58 ■ 


awake half the night, like a sweet, bewildering caress, but 
often they were dark and terrible. 

His mother, the long-forgotten, had come again. She had 
brought great joy, but whither did her siren-call entice him? 
Out into the unknown world, into enthralment, need, per¬ 
haps to death. She would never lead him back to safety; 
to the peace of cloister schools and dormitories, and a life¬ 
long fellowship with monks: her call had nothing in it of the 
commands laid on him by his father, which for so long he 
had imagined his own wishes. Yet this new emotion, at 
times as strong, poignant, and full of life as any sensation 
in his body, awakened all the piety in Goldmund. In repe¬ 
titions of many prayers to God’s Holy Mother in the sky 
he poured forth the too-great emotion in himself, which 
drew him back to his own mother. But many of these 
prayers would end in strange, haunting dreams of delight 
and triumph, day-dreams of the half-awakened senses, visions 
of her in whom all his senses had their share, and then, 
with its scents and longings, the mother-world would lie 
about him; its life calling enigmatically; his mother’s eyes 
were deeper than the sea, eternal as the gardens of paradise, 
she lulled him with gentle, senseless words, or indeed with 
all the gentleness of the senses: life would taste .sweet and 
salt upon her lips; his mother’s silky hair would fall around 
him, tenderly brushing his mouth and longing eyes, and not 
only was this mother all purity, not only the .skyey gentle¬ 
ness of love, the clear, serene promise of smiling happiness; 
in her, somewhere hidden beneath enticements, lay all the 
storm and darkness of the world, all greed, fear, sin, and 
clamouring grief, all birth, all human mortality. 

Her son would lose himself in these dreams, in the many- 
threaded woof of his living senses. More than the past 
which he had loved came alive, as by magic, in his mind, 
than babyhood and his mother’s tenderness, the twinkling 
dayspring of his life: these thoughts held promises and 

59 




threats, enticements and dangers to come. He would wake 
at times from such a vision of his mother as both madonna 
and ravisher, as filled him with a sense of horrible sin, sacri¬ 
lege, and vilification of God, death from which he could 
never rise again. At others all was harmony and release. 
Life full of her secrets lay about him: a magic garden 
grown with enchanted trees, flowers bigger than any in the 
world; deep, misty hollows. In the grass there were glit¬ 
tering eyes of unknown beasts, smooth powerful snakes 
glided along the branches: from every bough hung clu.sters 
of glittering berries which, when he plucked them, swelled 
within his hand, spurted soft, warm sap, like blood, or had 
eyes on them, and slithered cunningly. He would lean 
against a tree and feel its trunk, clutch down a branch and 
stare at it, touch, between bough and stem, a cluster of thick, 
wild hairs, like the hairs in an armpit. Once he dreamed 
himself his patron-saint, the holy Chrysostom, the golden- 
tongued, whose mouth was gold, from which he uttered 
golden words, and the words were a swarm of little birds, 
rising and flying off in glittering bands. 

And once he dreamed he was grown to manhood, yet 
could only sit on the ground, like a child, had clay before 
him, and kneaded it like a child, till the clay began to shape 
itself in images: a little horse; a bull; a little woman. Thi.s 
kneading of clay delighted him, and he gave his little men 
and women the biggest genitals he could fashion, since, 
in his dream, that seemed to him very witty. He grew tired 
of his game, stood up and left it, and suddenly felt some¬ 
thing behind him, something huge and noiseless, and, look¬ 
ing back, saw in great amazement and terror, yet not 
without some pleasure in his work, that his little clay men ■ 
and women were huge and alive. Powerful, dumb giants, 
they came marching past him, growing, and growing as 
they went; out into the world, high as towers. 

He lived more truly in this dream-world than in the real. 
6o 


The school, the courtyard, the dormitory, the library, the 
cloister chapel, had become only the surface of reality, a 
trembling outer film, encasing the image-world of dreams, 
the deep intensity of life. Any trifle served to rend this 
outer veil; some sound of a Greek word, in the midst of the 
dullest lesson, a whiff of scent from the herb-stuffed wallet 
of Pater Anselm, the simple-gatherer; a glance at the clus¬ 
tered leaves which twined over the arches of a window; 
such nothings as these could dispel the illusion called reality, 
opening up, beneath its sober peace, the whirling depths, 
torrents, and starry heights of the world imagined in his 
soul. A Latin initial would frame the radiant eyes of his 
mother, a long-drawn note in the Ave open some inner gate 
in Paradise, a Greek letter become a galloping horse, a rear¬ 
ing snake, sliding in and out among flowens, till it vanished 
and left him staring down at the dull page of a grammar 
book. 

He never told all this; only now and then would he hint 
of it to Narziss. ‘I believe,’ he said to him once, 'that the 
cup of a flower, or a little, slithering worm on a garden- 
path, says more, and has more things to hide, than all the 
thousand books in a library. Often, as I write some Greek 
letter, a theta or omega,, I have only to give my pen a twist, 
and the letter spreads out, and becomes a fish, and I, in an 
instant, am set thinking of all the streams and rivers in the 
world, of all that is wet and cold; of Homer’s sea, and the 
waters on which Peter walked to Christ. Or else the letter 
becomes a bird, grows a tail, ruffles out his feathers, and 
flies off. Well, Narziss, I suppose you think nothing of such 
letters. But I tell you this: God writes the world with them.’ 

‘I esteem them highly,’ said Narziss sadly, ‘they are magic 
letters, and every dream can be conjured up with them. 
But, alas, they cannot be used for learning sciences, Thought 
loves definitions, and clear forms, and needs to be able to 
trust’its signs for things: it likes what isj and not what is to 
/ ' 6i 








be, and so it cannot bear to call an omega snake or a theta 
bird. Now, Goldmund, do you believe what I told you, that 
we should never turn you into a scholar ? ’ 

Oh yes, Goldmund had long since agreed with him, and 
long since known himself resigned to it. 

‘i no longer care to strive after your learning,’ he said, 
almost with a laugh, ‘and I feel now for all learning and 
intellect what once I used to feel for my father. I used to 
think I loved him very dearly, hoped that I had made 
myself very like him, and swore by everything he said. But 
my mother came back, to show me what true love is, and, 
beside her image my father’s memory shrank to nothing. 
It displeased me; I came near hating it. And now I almost 
think that all learning is like my father; that it hates my 
father, and has no love in it, and so I begin to despise it a 
little.’ 

Though he jested in saying all this he could not bring 
any smile to his friend’s sad face. Narziss studied him in 
silence, his glance almost a caress. Then he said; 

‘I understand you well. Now we have no need to dispute: 
you are awake, and so you have seen the difference between 
us, the difference between men akin to their father and those 
who take their destiny from a woman; the difference be¬ 
tween spirit and intellect. And now too you will also soon 
have perceived that your life in the cloister, and longing 
to be a monk were a mispri.sion; a device of your father, 
who sought to purge your mother’s memory, or perhaps 
only tube revenged on her. Or do you still imagine it your 
destiny to stay here all the days of your life?’ 

Goldmund considered a while, studying the hands of his 
friend, thin, delicate, white hands; soft and yet resolute. 
Every one could perceive in them a monk’s hands. 

‘I do not know,’ he replied, in the slow, singing, voice 
in which he had spoken for some time, a voice which seemed 
to pause on every syllabic. ‘How can I tell you? You may 
62 


be judging my father a little harshly. He knew much grief. 
But perhaps in this too you may be right. I have been many 
years in this cloister, and' yet he has never come to visit me. 
He hopes I shall stay here always. Perhaps it would be 
best if I did, since I, too, used always to wish it. But today 
I no longer know myself, nor my real wishes and hopes. 
Once everything seemed so easy, as easy as the letters in a 
grammar-book: and now nothing is easy, not even those 
letters. I cannot tell what is to become of me, and, for now, 
I don’t want to think about it.’ 

‘Nor need you,’ answered Narziss. ‘Your way will soon 
lie clear before you. It has begun by leading you back to 
your mother, and will bring you even nearer her than you 
are. As for your father I do not judge him too harshly. Do 
you feel you would like to go back to him ? ’ 

‘No, Narziss, that I should not! If I felt I could, I would 
do it, as soon as I was clear of school. Or even now, perhaps, 
since I never intend to be a scholar. I have learned enough 
Greek and Latin and mathematics. No, I do not want to go 
back to my father.’ , 

He gazed out abstractedly; then, with a sudden cry: 

‘But what trick do you use to question me thus again and 
again, in words that illumine my mind, and make me see 
into myself? Now again it is only your question if I want to 
go back to my father which makes me perceive that I do not 
How do you do it? You seem to know everything. You have 
taught me so many things about our friendship which I 
did not understand at the time I heard them, and later they 
seemed full of meaning and consequence. It was you who 
told me I take my life from my mother; you discovered 
first that I lay under a spell, and had lost the memory of my 
childhood. How is it you can know me .so well? Could I 
learn that from you also?’ 

Narziss smiled and shook his head. 

‘No, that you could never learn. There are men 

,63 " ■ 


who can learn many things, but you are not one of them. 
You will never be a learner. Why should you be? You 
have no need of it. You have other gifts, and far more than 
I: you are richer, yet not so strong as I am, and your life 
will be fairer than mine, and harder. Often you did not 
want to understand me; you jibbed away like a young colt. 
It was not always easy, and I must have made you smart. 
But you were asleep, I had to wake you. It hurt you even 
to be put in mind of your mother, and your pain was so 
great that they found you stretched half-dead in the inner 
cloister. It had to be - no, leave stroking my hair! No, 
stop I tell you 11 can’t bear it.’ 

‘So you think I shall never learn! All my life I shall be 
stupid, like a child.’ 

‘There will be others there from whom you can learn. 
You, child, I have taught you all I could, and now the lesson 
is over.’ 

‘Oh no,’ cried Goldmund, ‘it was not for that we be¬ 
came such friends. What kind of friendship would that 
be, that ended at our first milestone. Have you known 
me so long that I weary you? Have you had enough of 
me?’ 

Narziss paced quickly up and down, his eyes to the 
ground, and came to a halt before his friend. 

‘Let be,’ he whispered, ‘you know very well you do not 
weary me.’ He eyed him as though in doubt, then started 
his pacing to and fro again; stopped again, and stared at 
Goldmund, with firm eyes from his stern face. In a low, 
clear, resolute voice he spoke: ‘Listen, Goldmund. Our 
friendship has been a good one: it has had its particular 
goal, and reached it, since now you are roused from your 
half-sleep. But now we have no more to achieve. Your pur¬ 
poses are still uncertain, and I can neither lead you nor 
accompany you. Ask your mother; ask her image, and 
listen. My aims are not misty and far-off; they lie here 

64 ■: 


around me in the cloister, demanding fresh efforts with 
every hour. I can be your friend, I can never love you. I 
am a monk, and have taken my oath to God. Before I make 
my final vows I shall ask to be relieved of my office as 
teacher, and go into retreat to fast and do penance. Through¬ 
out that time not a word of earth must pass my lips; not 
even to you.’ 

Goldmund understood. He answered sadly: 

‘So now you will do as I should have done had I entered 
the order as a monk. But when your retreat is over, and you 
have fasted, watched, and prayed long enough - what will 
your goal be then?’ 

‘You know that,’ Narziss answered him. 

‘Yes. In a few years you will be the teaching-superior, 
then, perhaps comptroller of the school. You will better the 
teaching, add many new scrolls to the library: perhaps you 
will write books yourself. Will you not? You shake your 
head. What will you do then ? ’ 

Narziss smiled rather sadly: ‘What shall I do in the end? 
Who knows? I may die as head of the school, or as abbot 
or bishop. That is all one. But my aim is this: always to 
be where I can serve best, where my disposition, talents, 
and industry may find their best soil and be most fruitful. 
That is the only aim in my life.’ 

Goldmund: ‘The only aim for a monk. Is that what you 
mean?’ Narziss: ‘Oh yes; and object enough. A monk’s 
whole life may be spent in learning Hebrew; or he may live 
to annotate Aristotle, to decorate his cloister church, or shut 
himself up and meditate on God, or a hundred and one 
other things. But none of all these are final aims. I neither 
wish to multiply the riches of the cloister, nor reform the 
order,_ nor the Church. What I wish is to serve the spirit 
within me, as I understand its commands, and nothing 
more. Is that an aim?’ 

Goldmund considered this: 

65 







‘You are right,’ he said. ‘Have I hindered you much in 
its achievement.?’ 

‘Hindered? Oh, Goldmund, no other has helped me more 
than you. You sometimes set difficulties in my way, but I 
am not one to shrink from difficulties. I learnt from all of 
them, and, in a sense, I overcame them.’ 

Goldmund interrupted him almost mockingly: 

‘You have conquered them all. But tell me this. By help¬ 
ing me and giving me back my memory, and freeing my 
soul, and so restoring me to health - were you truly serv¬ 
ing the spirit? Have you not robbed the cloister of a zealous 
and obedient novice, and perhaps raised up an enemy of the 
spirit, one who will do and feel the opposite of all that 
you consider holy?’ 

‘Why not?’ said Narziss very gravely. ‘Amice, you still 
know so little of me! True that in you I have spoilt a 
future monk, and in place of him have opened out a path in 
you which may lead you to no common destiny. But even 
if tomorrow you were to burn down this whole fair cloister, 
or propagate some wild heresy in the world, I should not 
feel an instant’s remorse for having helped you to it.’ 

He laid friendly hands on Goldmund’s shoulders. 

‘Listen, little Goldmund, this too is part of my ambition I 
Whether I become a teacher or abbot, confessor, or whatever 
else it may be, I never wish to be of such a sort that when a 
strong man crosses my path - a man of high worth and real 
capacity - I find myself unable to understand him, find 
myself his enemy in my heart, unable, if I will, to further his 
purposes. And this I say to you: You and I may turn into 
this or that; we may meet either good or bad fortune; but 
you never shall lack my help if you truly ask for it, and feel 
in your heart that you need me, since my hand will never be 
against you. Never.’ 

These words had the ring of a farewell, and indeed they 
were the foretaste of their leave-taking. As Goldmund stood 
66 


I. 

I 




gazing at his friend, with his resolute face and eyes that 
seemed to see far beyond him, he could feel, past all de¬ 
ceiving, that now they were no longer brothers and com¬ 
rades, no longer one another’s kind: that their lives had 
sundered them already, This man who faced him was no 
dreamer, waiting - as he must wait, on some hidden admoni¬ 
tion of destiny: he was a monk who had inscribed himself 
on the roll, accepting his strict duties and rule; a soldier in 
the service of his order, of God and the Church. But now 
Goldmund knew for a certainty that here was no place for 
such as he: he was homeless, and the unknown world 
awaited him. So also had it been with his mother. She had 
left house and court, man and child, company and all fair 
pastime, good order, reverence, and duty, to go forth into 
the huge, uncertain world, and in it had certainly perished. 
She had had no aim, as he, too, had none. Aims were set to 
others, not to him. Oh, how well Narziss had seen all this, 
long ago: how right he had been! 

And already, soon after this, Narziss seemed to have 
vanished from his life. It was as though he were suddenly 
wrapt away. Another teacher gave his lesiions: his lectern 
in the library stood empty. .Still hovering, not altogether 
invisible, he would sometimes pass quickly through the 
cloisters; at others his murmuring voice could be heard at 
a side-altar, as he knelt praying on the stones. He had 
entered his retreat for his final vows; it was known he 
kept .strict fasts and rose three times in the night for office. 
He was still there, yet half in another world, could be seen, 
though seldom, but never reached. They could not speak, 
and now there could be nothing more between them, and 
though Goldmund knew that Narziss would return, would 
sit again at his desk, his place in the refectory, and his voice 
be heard again in the schools, yet nothing of what he had 
been would ever return with him. Narziss would not be¬ 
long to him any more. 



67 



So that, with this thought, it grew clear to him that Nar- 
ziss alone had made him love the cloister and the monks, 
with their grammar and logic, study, and intellect. It was 
Narziss who had given all this its meaning: Narziss’s ex¬ 
ample had enticed him; to become as Narziss had been his 
aim, It is true that the abbot was still there, and he, also, 
Goldmund had honoured; he had loved him, too, and seen 
in him his example. But the others, the teachers, his fellow- 
scholars, the dormitories, the cloisters, the refectory, the 
lessons and exercises in syntax, the service of God - the 
whole of Mariabronn - without Narziss it all meant nothing. 
Why did he still remain here? He waited under this cloister 
roof like an undecided shelterer from the rain, taking cover 
under any tree or penthouse; a guest who still delays be¬ 
cause of the unfriendliness of the world. 

Now Goldmund’s days were nothing but a lingering fare¬ 
well He would seek out all the things that had meaning for 
him, all he had grown to love in the cloister, beginning, in 
amazement, to perceive how few of the faces that surrounded 
him would cost him any pain after he. left them. There was 
Narziss and old Abbot Daniel, and the good, gentle leech, 
Pater Anselm; and then, perhaps his friend, the brother- 
porter, and perhaps the miller, their jolly neighbour. Yet 
even these seemed half-unreal to him. Far harder to say 
farewell to the great stone virgin in her chapel, the apostles 
over the arch of the gateway. He would stand for an hour 
together examining them, or the beautiful, intricate carving 
of the choir-stalls, gaze at the cloister fountains, the pillar 
with its three beasts’ heads, and, in the court, would lean 
against the lime-trees and the chestnut. Soon all these would 
be a memory, a little picture-book in his heart. Even now, 
though still they surrounded him, they were beginning 
slowly to fade out. With Pater Anselm, who liked his com¬ 
pany, he would go forth, gathering simples, or gossip with 
die men at the mill who sometimes asked him into their 


mill-loft, to a platter of baked fish, and wine. But already 
it was strange, and half a memory. As over there, in the 
twilight of the church and of his cell, Narziss, withdrawn 
to fast and pray, had taken on the dimensions of a ghost, so 
too was this reality fading round him: it all breathed 
autumn and the past. 

Now there was only one thing left that mattered: the 
wild beating of his heart, an anxious pricking of desire in 
him, the joy and terror of his dreams. To these he now 
belonged, and let them master him. As, one of many class¬ 
mates, he seemed to study, he could sink down into himself 
and forget his fellows, plunge through the murmuring tor¬ 
rent in his heart, and let its current swirl him away with 
it; into deep pools echoing with dark music, clouded depths 
of fairy sounds and happenings, all calling him with the 
voices of his mother, their thousand eyes his mother’s eyes. 





CHAPTER SIX 


One day Pater Anselm called Goldmund into his phar¬ 
macy, a little sweet-smelling room, where he felt at home. 
The old man showed him a dried plant, neatly laid up 
between two sheets of parchment, and asked if he knew 
its name, and could describe it, as it looked out there, 
growing in the fields. Yes, said Goldmund, he knew it 
well, and the name of the plant was John’s Wort. Pie was. 
asked for an account of all its particulars, and the old monk 
seemed satisfied with his answers. He therefore com¬ 
manded the scholar to go out that afternoon, and gather 
him an armful of these simples, giving him exact direction 
of the places where they most delight to grow. ‘You will 
have half a play-day for your pains, and so lose nothing by 
your trouble, and I think you have nothing to say against it. 
It takes some study to know herbs as well as all your silly 
grammar books.’ 

Goldmund thanked him for such a pleasant errand to 
spend a few hours plucking flowers, instead of fidgeting on 
a bench: then, that his pleasure might be complete, he 
begged for the loan of Bless, his horse, from the brother- 
ostler, and, after dinner, led it from its stall. It neighed 
him greetings, he jumped: on its back, and galloped off, 
through the warm summer’s day, rejoicing. He rode here 
and there for more than an hour, sniffing the fresh air and 
Kent of the fields, and very pleased to be on horseback, 
then he remembered his commission, and sought a place 
which Pater Anselm had described to him. This ^ found, 
he tethered his horse in the shade of a maple tree, talked to 
him for a while and gave him bread to eat, and so set out to 

70 


gather simples. Here were some strips of fallow land, grown 
about with every sort of herb, little wizened poppy-stalks, 
witli tlieir last faded petals still upon them; and already 
many ripening seed-pods stood there among the withered 
vetch, and wild succory, blue as the sky, and spotted knot- 
weed: green lizards ran in and out upon the heap of stones 
between two fields, and there, too, already, stood the first 
yellow clumps of flowering John’s Wort, and these Gold¬ 
mund .started to gather. 

When he had a good armful he sat down to rest, on the 
heap of stones. It was hot, and he looked with longing at the 
deep blue shade that edged a far-off wood, thougli he did 
not care to stray so far from his plants, and from Bless, his 
horse, whom he still could see, from where he sat. So there 
he stayed, on his heap of stones, sitting very still, in the hope 
that a lizard would run his way, sniffing his John’s Wort, 
and holding its little petals against the light, to see the hun¬ 
dred pin-point,s in each. 

‘How wonderful,’ he thought, ‘that each of the,se 
thousand tiny leaves should have a whole starry heaven 
hidden in it.’ It was all a miracle and a mystery; the lizards, 
plants, stones, all of it together! Pater Anselm, who liked 
him so well, had grown too sti ff to come out gathering leaves: 
the rheum took him in his legs, and now there were many 
days when he could not stir, though none of his own simples 
would heal him. Perhaps he would soon be dead, and the 
herbs in his closet still give out their fragrance, though old 
Pater Anselm was gone for ever. But he might live many 
years yet, another ten or twenty years, still with the same 
thin white hair and criss-crossed wrinkles under his eyes: 
and what would Goldmund be in twenty years? Oh, it was 
all hard to understand, and all sad, although it was so 
beautiful. Nobody really knew anything. People lived; they 
went here and there about the earth and rode through forests; 
so much seemed to challenge or to promise, and so many 

71 



sights to stir our longing: an evening star, a blue harebell, 
a lake half-covered in green reeds, the eyes of beasts and 
human eyes; and always it was as though something would 
happen, something never seen and yet sighed for, as though 
a veil would be pulled back off the world; till the feeling 
passed, and there had been nothing. The riddle was still 
unsolved, the hidden magic unrevealed, so that, in the end, 
people grew old, and looked comic, like old Father Anselm, 
or wise like old Abbot Daniel, though really perhaps they 
still knew nothing, still waited, pricking up their ears. 

He picked up an empty snail-shell; it had rolled, with a 
tinkle, off a stone, and was warmed through and through by 
the sun. Sunk deep in thought, he stared at the notched 
spirals, the curious twist of the little crown, the frail, empty 
house, in which light was pearly. He shut his eyes, to know 
it with his fingers only. That was an old game he often 
played with himself: holding the shell gently between his 
fingers, he stroked it lightly round and round, not pressing 
it, rejoicing in all shape, all magic of corporeal things. It 
seemed to him that, with our minds, we are inclined to see 
and think of everything as though it were flat, and had only 
height and breadth. Somehow or other, he felt, this denoted 
the lack and worthlessness of all learning, yet he could not 
seize his thought, and define it. The snail-shell slipped 
through his fingers: he felt very drowsy, and longed to 
sleep. His head fell forward over his plants, which gave out 
a powerful scent as they started to wither, and so he fell 
asleep in the sunshine. Over his shoes swarmed ants; the 
bundle of fading herbs lay on his knees, Bless champed 
and whinnied under the maple. 

Then some one came from the far-off wood, a young 
peasant woman, in a pale-blue, faded gown, with a scarlet 
kerchief bound round her dark hair, and her face tanned 
brown by the summer, a red gillyflower gleaming between 
her lips, and paused in her stride to watch the sleeper. For 

■ ■ ■ ■ :■ 72 


long she stood some distance away, to examine him, curious, 
and full of mistrust: then, convinced he was asleep, came 
cautiously nearer, on bare feet. Her fear of him melted 
away. This pretty sleeper pleased her well, and now he 
did not seem to her dangerous. How did he come to be out 
here in the fields.? He had been plucking flowers, she saw 
with a smile, and already his flowers were almost faded. 

Goldmund opened his eyes, returning from a forest of 
dreams. Now his head was pillowed on softness, since it 
lay in a woman’s lap; down over his sleepy, wondering eyes, 
two strange eyes bent, warm and brown. He did not start, 
there was no danger, the two warm, brown stars shone down 
on him. The woman smiled at his astonishment, and in her 
smile he saw such gentleness that suddenly he, too, began to 
smile. Down to his smiling lips she bent her mouth, and, 
in a flash, as their lips joined, Goldmund remembered again 
that night in the village, and thought of the little maid, 
with her dark plaits. But their kiss had not ended yet; 
her mouth still lingered upon his, drawing out its love, 
enticing, stroking against him, till at last the lips fastened 
with greedy power, firing his blood, and sending it coursing 
through his body, while in a long, dumb act, the brown 
; woman taught him to love, letting him seek her and find her, 
letting her love flame up in him and stilling it. 

Their clear, brief transport flickered and died out between 
them, glowing like a swift gold flame, bending upon itself, 
and dying down. With closed eyes they lay there together, 
his head on the peasant woman’s brea.st. There was no 
word said between them: she stirred no muscle in her body, 
only gently stroking his hair, letting him come slowly to 
himself again. At last he opened his eyes. 

‘You 1 ’ he said.‘Where do you come from ? ’ 

‘I am Lisa,’ she answered him. 

‘Lisa,’ he said it after her, delighting in it. ‘Lisa, you 
are very beautiful.’ 


73 


She bent her mouth down to his ear! 

‘Did you never love before me ? ’ 

He shook his head. Then suddenly sat up and stared 
about him, across the fields, and at the sky. 

‘Oh, the sun is almost down,’ he cried, ‘and I must get 
back 

‘Where then?’ 

‘Back to the cloister. To Pater Anselm.’ 

‘In Mariabronn? Is that your home? Oh, stay with me 
a little longer.’ 

‘I would stay if I could.’ 

‘Well, stay then.’ 

‘No, it would not be right. And now I have to pluck 
some more of these-’ 

‘But are you a brother in the cloister?’ 

‘No. But I am a scholar. I shall not stay there. Could I 
come to you, Lisa? Where do you live. Where lies your 
house?’ 

T live nowhere, my heart. But tell me your name. So, 
Goldmund is what they call you. Give me, a kiss, little 
Gold-mouth. Then you may go.’ 

‘You live nowhere? Where do you sleep, then?’ 

‘If you like I’ll sleep with you in the forest, or in the hay 
together. Come tonight.’ 

‘Oh yes, I’ll come. Where shall I find you ?’ 

‘Can you hoot like a little owl ?’ 

‘I never tried it,’ 

‘Well, try it now.’ 

He tried. She laughed and was pleased. ' 

‘Well, come to me tonight, out of the cloister, then, and 
cry like an owlet, and I’ll be waiting for you. Do I please 
you then, little Gold-mouth, pretty one?’ 

‘Oh, Lisa, yes, you please me greatly. I will come. God 
keep you: I must go now.’ 

On his steaming horse Goldmund galloped back to the 


cloister, and was-glad to find Pater Anselm very busy. A 
brother had been paddling in the mill-stream, and had cut 
his foot on a flint in it. 

Now he must seek out Narziss. He asked of him from the 
lay-brother who waited at supper in the refectory. No, said 
the brother, Narziss would eat no supper that night. He had 
fasted all day long, and must be asleep, since during the 
night he would have a vigil. Goldmund made haste. Now, 
during his long penitence and retreat, his friend spent his 
nights in the penitents’ cells, in the inner cloister, and 
without thought of rules, he ran thither, stood at the door of 
Narziss’s cell and listened. But no sound came from within. 
He stole in on tiptoe. He had no thought that all this was 
strictly forbidden him. 

There, on his narrow pallet, lay Narziss, like a corpse 
stretched out in the twilight, stiff, on his back, his pale thin 
face to the ceiling, his hands crossed on his breast. But he 
did not .sleep, his eyes were wide. He stared, without a 
word, at Goldmund, not angry, but with no sign of life, 
.so wrapped, it seemed, from outer things, and sunk in 
contemplation beyond time. He had some pains to recognize 
his friend, and grasp the sense of what was said to him. 

‘Narziss, Narziss! Forgive me for having roused you. 
Blit I did not do it in idleness. I know it is forbidden you 
to speak to me, but I beg you to forget that, and answer.’ 

Narzks raised himself up, blinking a minute in astonish¬ 
ment, as though it cost him an effort to come to life. 

‘Is it necessary ?’he asked in a dead voice. 

‘Ye,s, very necessary. I am come to bid you farewell’ 

‘Yes, then it is necessary. And you shall not have come 
to me for nothing. Come now, sit here beside me. A quarter 
of an hour will be enough, and then the first vigil will have 
begun.’ 

He sat, thin and haggard, on his plank: Goldmund came 
over to his .side. 





‘Forgive me,’ he said, in a guilty voice. This cell, the 
pallet, Narziss’s face, worn with concentration and lack of 
sleep, his eyes, half-conscious of the world, all told him 
clearly that he was troublesome. 

‘There is nothing to forgive. Don’t heed me. I lack for 
nothing. You say that you come to take your leave of me. 
So you are going away from the cloister ? ’ 

‘I am; this very day. Oh, how shall I say it to you? 
Suddenly it has all been decided.’ 

‘Is your father there, or any messenger from him ? ’ 

‘No, nothing. Life itself has come to me. I shall creep 
off, without the abbot’s leave or my father’s. I shall break 
from the cloister, Narziss, and bring shame on you.’ 

Narziss stared down at his white fingers, issuing, thin as 
ghosts, from the wide monk’s sleeve. There was no smile 
on his stern, exhausted face, yet a kind of smile in his voice, 
as he answered: 

‘Amice, our time is very short. Tell me all I need to 
know, and say it as briefly and clearly as you can, Or must 
I tell you what has happened to you?’ 

‘Tell me,’begged Goldmund. 

You are in love, boy. And already you have known a 
woman.’ 

‘How you always read me.’ 

This is easy. Your face and bearing, o amice, show every 
mark of that drunkenness which men call “being in love”. 
But say it yourself, please.’ 

Goldmund shyly touched his friend’s shoulder. 

^ You have told yourself. And yet, Narziss, this time you 
did not say it well or accurately. This is all quite different 
from drunkenness. I lay out there in the fields, and fell 
asleep, and when I woke my head lay on the knees of a 
woman, whose beauty was such that I felt my mother had 
come back to me, and taken me back into herself. Not that 
iheld this woman to be my mother. She has dark brown 

76 - 


eyes, and dark hair, and my mother’s hair vvas gold as 
mine, her face was altogether different. And yet it was 
she, She called me, and this woman was her messenger, who 
cradled my head in her lap, and kissed as softiy as a flower, 
and was gentle with me, so gentle that her first kiss made 
me feel as though something in me had melted, , till my 
whole body thrilled with wonderful pain. All the longing I 
had ever felt in my life, all secrets and sweet fears that had 
lain asleep in me, came to life, transformed and renewed, 
with another meaning in them. In a little time she had made 
me older by many years. Now I know much, and of this I 
was suddenly quite certain: that now I can live here no 
longer, not another day in this cloister. I shall escape as soon 
as it is dark.’ 

Narziss listened, and nodded. 

‘It has come upon you suddenly,’ he said, ‘but this is 
what I had always expected. I shall think of you often, and 
long to have you back, amice. Can I do anything to help 
you?’ 

‘Yes, if you can bring yourself to do it, say a word in 
my excuse to our abbot, so that he does not condemn me 
utterly. You and he are the only two in the house for whose 
thoughts and good opinion I care anything. You and he.’ 

‘I know. And is that all?’ 

‘Yes - though I would ask this: when later you think of 
me, pray for me. And... thanks, Narzks, .. 

‘For what, Goldmund?’ 

‘For all your patience, and your friendship. Also for hav¬ 
ing listened to me today, when everything outside you is 
.so difficult. And thank you, toOj for not having tried to 
hinder me.’ 

‘Why should I? You know my thoughts about all this. 
But where will you go, my Goldmund? Have you any aim, 
you who are going to your woman ?’ 

‘Yes. I shall go along with her. I have no other aim 

77 



apart from her. She is a wanderer, a homeless one, or so 
she says; perhaps a gipsy.’ 

‘I understand. But listen, Goldmund: your way with 
her may be a very short one. You should not trust her too 
much, I think. Perhaps she has a husband and kindred. 
Who knows what kind of welcome they may give you I ’ 

Goldmund bent closer to his friend. 

‘I know all that,’ he said, ‘although, till now, I had not 
thought it. But as I told you; I have no aim. This woman 
is not my aim, although she was very tender and gentle with 
me. Though I go to her it will not be for her sake. I go 
because I must; because it calls me.’ 

He sighed and was silent, and they sat close up to one 
another, sad, and yet happy together in their knowledge that 
their friendship would never end. Then Goldmund spoke 
again: , 

‘Don’t think me altogether blind and reckless. I am glad 
to go because I am sure I cannot stay; because today I 
have seen a miracle. But I do not deceive myself, or fancy 
that outside these walls it will all be pleasure and junketing, 
I can feel that my way will be rough: but, rough, or smooth, 
I hope it will be beautiful. It is very fine to love and know a 
woman, and give her love. Don’t laugh at me if what I 
say sounds crazy to you. But tell me this; to love a woman, 
and comfort her with my love, entwine my body with her 
body,: and feel myself altogether hers - all which you 
would call “to be enamoured”, the thing you seem to scorn 
a little - why is it to be scorned.? For me it is ray path 
into life. 

‘Oh, Narziss, and now I must leave you. I love you, 
Narziss, and many thanks for giving up your sleep today 
for my sake. Now it is very hard to say farewell. Will you 
forgetrae?’ 

‘Don’t grieve yourself for that, or me either, Goldmund. 
I shall never forget you. You will come back to me. I will 


pray that you come, and I shall be waiting. And if you ever 
find things go hard with you, come to me, or send me your 
messenger. God speed and keep you, my friend.’ 

He had risen. Goldmund embraced him. They did not 
kiss, since his friend shrank from all caresses, but he stroked 
his hands. 

Darkness had gathered. Narziss closed his cell door after 
him, and went along the cloister into the church, his sandals 
clattering on the flags. Goldmund, with love in his eyes, 
watched the lean figure go from him and vanish, swallowed 
up round a bend in the corridor by the gaping darkness of 
the church. How confused everything was, how infinitely 
glorious and unknowable. This, too - how terrifying and 
strange: to have come upon his friend at such a moment, 
when, worn almost to death-with fasting and long medita¬ 
tion, he had nailed his senses to a cross, bowed his head to 
the stern rule of obedience, resolute to serve only the spirit, 
offering his body as its sacrifice; had become, through and 
through, minister verbi divini. There like a corpse he had 
lain, half-dead from, weariness, with white face and pale 
thin hands, yet ready to give his clear, attentive sympathy 
to the friend about whose hair and body there still clung the 
savour of a woman, ready even to sacrifice the short time 
of rest between two penances, in order tojisten to his hopes. 
It was a glorious thought that there should be such love in 
the world, love that is all spirit and selfless joy. How dif¬ 
ferent from that love in the sunny field, the drunken, reck¬ 
less love of flesh and blood. And yet both were love. Alas, 
now Narziss had gone from him, having shown him again 
so clearly, in this last hour together, how far apart their 
natures lay. Now Narziss would be kneeling before the altar 
on aching knees, summoned and prepared for a night of 
vigil in which only two hours sleep were granted him, 
while he, Goldmund, would steal off and, somewhere under 
trees, meet Lisa, to play again the sweet game of beasts. 


Narziss would have found some notable things to say of it. 
But - he was not Narziss. It was not for him to unravel 
these fair and terrible enigmas, with notable sayings to 
explain them: he could only follow his own mad path as 
Goldmund, not knowing whither it would lead. All he 
could do was to give himself up to his own fate, and love his 
praying friend in the dark church no less than Lisa’s tender 
warmth, who awaited him. 

As now, in his heart a thousand conflicting longings, he 
stole away beneath the cloister limes, and climbed into the 
mill to escape, he could only smile at the sudden memory 
of that evening long ago with Conrad, when they had used 
this same secret passage out of the cloister, stealing off 
together ‘into the village’. How scared he had been, for 
all his excitement, as they crept out, one by one,, through the 
little hole! Now he would wriggle out through it for ever, 
onto far more forbidden, dangerous ways, yet now he felt 
no fear, had no thought for the abbot, had forgotten the 
brother-porter, the teachers. 

This time there were no planks in the mill, so he had to 
cross without a bridge. He stripped, and flung his clothes 
to the opposite bank, went naked through the deep, cold, 
swirling mill-stream, up to his chest in icy water. As he 
dressed again his thoughts returned to Narziss. Now, utterly 
shamed, he could see clearly that he, at this moment, only 
did what the other had led him to and foretold for him. 
That clever, mocking, Narziss came back, all too distinctly, 
into his mind, the thinker to whom he had said such foolish¬ 
ness, the friend who had opened his eyes at the cost of such 
sharp pain in an hour of destiny. He could hear again, as 
though Narziss were saying them, some of the things his 
friend had told him: ‘You sleep on your mother’s breast, I 
watch in a desert.’ ‘Your dreams are all of girls, mine of 
boys.’ 

For an instant his heart seemed to freeze; he stood alone 

8o 


in the night, and fearful: behind him the cloister, an unreal 
.home, yet one he had loved and long inhabited. 

Yet, with his fear, came another feeling: that now Narziss 
had ceased for ever to be his superior and guide, the friend 
whose eyes were used on his behalf. Today, he felt, he had 
strayed into a country in which he must find his way alone, 
through which no Narziss could ever guide him. He 
rejoiced to think that he knew it; it shamed him and 
troubled his heart to look back to the days of his discipleship. 
Now he could see; he had ceased to be a scholar and a 
child. 

It was good to know: and yet, how hard to take his leave. 
How hard to remember Narziss, on his knees over there in 
the dark church, to have no more to give him; not to be able 
to help, to be nothing to him. And to leave him for so long, 
for ever perhaps; not to feel him there any more, hearing 
his voice, seeing his clear and beautiful eyes. 

He shook it off, and went on down the pebbled road. 
A hundred paces clear of the cloister wall he stopped, drew 
in a breath, and let out as good an owl-cry as he could 
muster. Another owl-cry answered, away down the stream, 
out of the distance. 

‘We call to each other like beasts,’ was the thought that 
came to him, as he remembered their loves, that afternoon. 
Only then did he remember clearly how few had been 
the words that passed between them, how neither he nor 
Li.sa had thought to speak until their sports were at an end. 
Even then such words as they had used had been hurried, 
and of no account. 

What long talks he had had with Narziss! But now, it 
seemed, he had entered a world where words meant nothing, 
where they called to one another with bird-cries, and never 
spoke. He was ready for that, since today he had had no 
need of words or thoughts, only of Lisa, of her blind caresses 
without words, her desire and its sighing consummation. 





Lisa was there already, coming towards him from the 
wood. He stretched forth his arms to touch her, stroked her 
head with gentle, feeling hands, her hair, her throat, her 
shoulders, her slim young body to her hips. His arm slid 
round her waist, and they went off together without a word, 
nor did he think to ask where she was leading him. Her step 
was sure, through the dark wood, and he had some trouble 
in keeping up with her, she seemed to see, like a marten or a 
fox, with night-eyes; went foiward without once stumbling 
or running her head against dark branches. He let her lead 
him on to the thick of the wood, through the night; into 
blind, secret places without words, in a land without any 
thoughts. His had all fallen asleep, even droughts of his 
home, the cloister, and thoughts of Narziss. 

Without a word they sped on together through woodland 
darkness, over soft-springing moss and hard clusters of 
roots. At times between two high, sparse, tree-tops, a pale 
glint of far-off sky, and again the darkness was pitch-black, 
branches whipped his cheeks, brambles caught his clothes 
and held him. She, in every place, knew her way unerringly, 
never lost her trail, seldom stopped, seldom delayed. In a 
long while they came out on an open space where, over 
widely separated pines a wan sky stretched away before them 
and around them, lay a valley clothed in meadows. They 
waded through a little, silently trickling, stream. Here in 
the open it was even quieter than in the woods: no rustle 
among the bushes, no scurry or call of birds and beasts in the 
night; no crackle of twigs, Lisa stopped by a big haystack. 

Wll stay here,’she said. 

They lay down together in the hay, glad at first to lie side 
by side and rest, stretched out to listen to the silence, with 
both their bodies a little tired, feeling the sweat dry slowly 
off their foreheads, their cheeks cool. Goldmund crouched 
happily weary, hunched up his knees in sport, and spread 
his legs again, breathed in the night, and the scent of hay, in 


long deep breaths, thinking neither of past nor future. Only 
by slow degrees would he let himself be drawn into love by 
the magic warmth and odour of his beloved, repaying, little 
by little, her stroking hands with his caresses, suddenly 
happy as she too began to take fire, and wriggled up closer 
at his side. No, there was no need here of words or thoughts; 
clearly he felt whatever was needful for this delight, the 
young sap rising in his body, the clear, gentle loveliness of 
the maid, her joyous warmth and clinging greed, knowing 
at once that she asked of him another way of love than that 
which she had shown him in the sunshine; that now she 
would not teach or entice him, but lie there tense, to receive 
his onslaught and his longings. Quietly he lay, and let her 
current of passion flow through his body, the little, gently 
rising flame which, in exultation, came to dancing life in 
both together, making of their gipsy’s sleeping-place a richly 
glowing canopy of splendour, set in the wide, silent night. 
As he bent over Lisa’s face to kiss her lips in the dark, 
suddenly a pale, lost shimmer surrounded her eyes and 
forehead: he stopped in wonder, as the light glowed up to 
quick intensity. Then he understood, and turned his head. 
The creeping moon had climbed to the open sky over long, 
black, straggling battlements of forest. He watched the pale 
light flow gently onwards, down across her forehead and 
cheeks, over the round, warm throat, and whispered his 
delight in her ear; ‘Oh - you are beautiful! ’ 

She smiled, as though for a gift: he rose on his elbow and 
gently pulled away her garment, helping her to cast the stuff 
aside, and strip off her husk till breast and shoulders lay 
shining in the soft, cool light. Held in enchantment, he 
followed the tender shadow with eyes and lips along her 
body, kissing and gazing. She lay like death, as if bewitched; 
her eyes cast down, and on her face a look of ceremony, as 
though in that instant, even to her, her beauty lay revealed 
for the first time. 



CHAPTER SEVEN 

While the moon stole on over fields, higher and higher 
hour by hour, the lovers lay on their pearly bed together, 
lost in their games, waking and sleeping, and, as they 
woke, turning towards each other, ever to renew the fire 
between them, wreathed into one another, and so to sleep 
again. Their last embraces done they lay worn out, Lisa 
with her face deep in hay, Goldmund stretched on his back, 
staring up at the milky sky. A deep sadness rose in both of 
them, from which they turned for refuge to sleep. When 
he woke, Goldmund saw Lisa, busy with her long dark 
hair. He watched her for a while through sleepy eyes. 

‘Already awake ?’he said at last. 

She turned with a start, as though he had surprised and 
terrified her. ‘I must leave you now,’ she said in a low voice, 
a little guiltily. ‘I did not think to wake you.’ 

‘But now I am awake. Must we go on our way already, 
then? We have no home.’ 

‘Yes, yes, we have,’ said Lisa. ‘You come from the 
cloister.’ 

‘I shall never go back to the cloister. I am like you; I 
am all alone and have no home. Of course I will go along 
with you.’ 

She looked away from him. 

‘Goldmund, you cannot come with me. I must go to 
my husband. He will beat me for staying out the night. I 
shall tell him that I lost my way, but of course he will never 
believe me.’. 

Then Goldmund remembered how this had been pre¬ 
dicted by Narziss. Now it was upon him^ 

84 


He stood up and gave her his hand. 

‘I have made a mistake; I thought we should stay to¬ 
gether always. But did you truly mean to let me sleep, and 
run off without another word?’ 

‘Oh, I thought you would take it ill, and beat me perhaps. 
My husband beats me, but that is his right, it is in order. I 
did not want you to beat nne.’ 

He kept tight hold of her hand. 

‘Lisa,’ he said, ‘I will never beat you. Neither today nor 
ever. Would you not rather come with me than go back 
to your husband who beats you ? ’ 

She pulled away from him. 

‘No! No! Nol’ she cried in a whining voice. And he, 
since he felt that in her heart she was already striving to 
be gone from him, that her husband’s beatings were sweeter 
than his good words, let go her hand, and she started weep¬ 
ing. But as she wept she ran. With her hand to her wet 
eyes she escaped from him. He said no more, and watched 
her go. In his heart he pitied her, as she scurried away 
through new-mown meadows, drawn off and called from 
him by some power, an unknown power, the thought of 
which had set him thinking. He pitied her, and also him¬ 
self, a little: his luck was out, it seemed, in this case; and he 
sat alone, somewhat forlorn, moping and left in the lurch. 
But he was still very tired and longed for sleep, never had 
he felt such weariness. Later there would be time for griev¬ 
ing: already his eyes had closed again; nor did he rouse 
himself up till the sun, high in the heavens, shone him 
awake. 

Now he was rested. He sprang up and ran to the stream, 
washed himself in it, and drank. Then memories came 
upon him, pictures like flowers from a strange land, drew 
him back to the joyous garden of the night, sensations of 
tenderness and heauty. His mind followed and retraced 
them as he went his aimless way over fields: every joy he 
85 


had felt he knew again; over and over again he touched 
and savoured. How many dreams this fair brown maid 
had given him, how many buds she had brought to flower, 
how much restless longing stirred, how much re-awakened! 

Wood and heath lay before him; dried fallow land and 
dark brown wood, and beyond it there would be mills, 
castles, and villages, and then a walled town. Now the 
world lay open to him at last, waiting, ready to take him 
into itself, give him his share of joy and pain: he was no 
schoolboy now, to stare out at the world through narrow 
windows, his way not a summer walk whose appointed end 
was a return. The whole vast earth was his reality, he was 
part of it, in it lay his destiny, its sky was his, its weather his. 
He was a small thing in a great world, running over fields 
like a hare, speeding on his way through blue and green 
eternity, like a cockchafer, with no bell to drag him from his 
bed, and send him to church and school and dinner. How 
hungry he felt! Half a loaf of barley bread, a bowl of milk, 
and meal broth - what magic memories! His belly howled 
like a wolf. He had come into a cornfield, standing half-ripe: 
he fleshed the ears with teeth and fingers, scrunched the 
small, glittering fruit in ecstasy, gathered more and more, 
crammed all his pockets, with ears of corn. Then he found 
hazel nuts, still very green, cracked tlieir shells with delight, 
and of these, too, laid in a store. 

The wood began again; pine trees, with oaks and ashes 
here and there, and here there was abundance of bilberries; 
he halted, and lay down to cool. Blue harebells grew in 
the spare coarse tuft-grass of the wood, brown, sunny 
butterflies fluttered past him, and disappeared in ragged 
flight. In just such a wood had lived St Genevieve, a saint 
whose face he had loved. How he would have liked to talk 
to her.. Perhaps here in the wood there was a hermitage, 
with an old, bearded Pater in a hollow of the rocks or a 
wattle hut. There might be charcoal burners in this wood, 


and with these he would gladly have spent his time. They 
might be robbers, and yet they would do him no harm. It 
was good to meet men, no matter which. But he knew he 
might wander long in this wood - today, tomorrow, and 
many days to come, and meet none. This, too, he would 
accept, if such were his fate; too much thought was bad, it 
was easier to take things as they came. He heard a wood¬ 
pecker tap and tried to stalk it. For long he tried in vain 
to get a sight of it, succeeded at last, and crouched there a 
while to watch it, as it bored and hammered at the trunk of 
its tree in solitude, preening its busy head this way and that. 
Why had he no speech to talk to beasts in.? It would have 
been so pleasant to bid good morrow to this woodpecker, 
pass the time of day, and hear of his work among the trees, 
his life and his friends. Oh, if a man could change his 
shape! He remembered howj in many idle hours, he had cut 
figures on wood with a stilus, leaves and flowers, trees, 
beasts, and men’s heads. He had often played this game 
with himself, sometimes, like a little God Almighty, fashion¬ 
ing his own creatures after his will, giving the cup of a 
flower eyes and a mouth, turning the leaves jutting out from 
a twig into fingers, and setting a head on a tree. This game 
hiid kept him happy for hours, drawing a line and letting 
himself be surprised when it shaped into a leaf or a fish- 
head, a fox’s tail or the eyebrow of a face. He should be able 
now to wander the world, he told himself, as easily as then, 
in his game, the lines he drew in sport had turned into 
shapes. Goldmund longed to be a woodpecker, perhapsior a 
day, perhaps a month living high up in tree-tops, flying 
around the summits of smooth trunks, picking them with 
his strong, sharp beak, and balancing against them with his 
tail feathers. He would have spoken woodpecker’s speech 
and dug out good things out of the bark. The hammering 
beak rang sweet above him. 

Goldmund met many beasts on his way through the forest, 

87 






many hares that shot like arrows out of the ferns as he 
approached themj stared at him, turned and scurried off, 
their ears down, white under their scuts. Once, in a little 
clearing, he came upon a long coiled snake, but it did not 
slither away, it was no living snake, only an empty skin, 
which he took and examined. Beautiful pattern ran along it, 
brown and green; the sun shone through; the skin was as 
frail as a spider’s web. He saw ouzels with yellow beaks, 
staring at him through round, black, .scared little eyes, and 
they darted off in a flock, close to the ground. There were 
many redbreasts and finches; at one place in the forest there 
was a pool, a deep stagnant puddle of green, thick water, 
over which ran industrious, busy spiders, chasing one an¬ 
other as though possessed, deep in some mysterious sport, 
and over them a pair of dragon flies, darting here and there, 
on dark blue wings. 

Once, as night came on, he saw something ~ or rather 
there was nothing there to .sec, only a scurry and stir through 
the undergrowth; he could hear a crackling of twigs, a thud¬ 
ding of scraped-iip earth, and a huge, half-invisible beast, 
grunting and hurtling through the leaves, perhaps a stag, 
perhaps a wild boar, he could not tell. I”Ie .stotxl a long while, 
panting with fright, hi.s ears strained with panic, listening to 
the. thudding, scurrying feet and, when all had long been still 
again, remained quiet and tense, with a thumping heart. 

He could not find his way out of the wood, so there he had 
to spend the night. A.s he looked about him for a sleeping- 
place, and plucked up heaps of moss for his bed, he tried to 
think how it would be if he never found his way out of 
forests, but were forced to live on in them for ever. It 
seemed to him that this would be terrible. In the end he 
might grow used to living on berries; he could sleep on 
moss if he chose, and no doubt he would .soon manage to 
build a hut, or even, perhap.s, to make a fire. But to be alone 
for ever and ever, housed between the quiet, sleeping tree- 


trunks, with beasts as his only companions, who would 
.scurry off at the sight of him, and with whom he could never 
exchange a word - that would be unbearably sad. Never to 
see another man; never to say good night or good morrow; 
not to be able to look again into human faces and human 
eyes, not to see a maid or woman, feel her kiss, and play the 
joyous, secret game of lips and limbs with her - oh, it was an 
unbearable thought. If .such were to be liis lot, he told 
himself, he would have to strive to change into a beast, a 
bear or a stag, even though he should lose his immortal 
soul by it. To be a bear and love a she-bear, that would not 
be such a bad life, and would, at least, be a far better one 
than to keep his reason and his thoughts, with all the rest 
that made him human, and yet live on alone, unloved, in 
sadness. 

On his bed of moss before he fell asleep, he listened, 
curious and afraid, to the many new, incomprehensible, and 
eerie nighuounds of the forest. These were his comrades 
now, and he must house with them, become accustomed to 
them all, measure himself against them, and bear with them: 
now he was made one with deer and foxes, with pines and 
firs; he must live their life, take his part of sun and air 
with them; with them await the day, go hungry with tliera, 
and be their guest. 

Then he fell asleep, and dreamed of beasts and human 
kind; became a bear, and ate up Lisa while he loved her. 
In the thick of night he woke in terror, could not tell why, 
felt horrible grief in his heart, and for long lay pondering 
uneasily. He remembered then how yesterday and tonight, 

' he had fallen asleep without having said his prayers. He 
stood up, knelt beside his moss-bed, and said his evening 
prayer twice through, once for last night and once for this. 
Soon after this he fell asleep again. 

At daybreak he sat up amazed, unable to remember where 

he was. His fear of the wild had soon grown less, and so, 


N.G."5 


with new joy in his heart, he trusted to the life of the woods, 
though still he strove to find his pathway out of them, and 
strayed on and on, turning his face towards the sun. Once 
he found a track through the forest, a smoothed-out path, 
with little undergrowth, the wood around it made of very 
thick and ancient pine trunks, soaring straight up into the 
sky. When he had gone a little way under these trees they 
began to remind him of the pillars of the great cloister 
church in Mariabronn, into which, so recently, he had seen 
Narziss swallowed up. When had that been? Was it really 
only two days ago? 

For three days and nights he strayed in the forest. Then, 
with delight, he saw that he had come back to human kind 
- ploughed land, on which stood oats and barley; meadows, 
over which, here and there, a little further on, he could see 
a field-path, Goldmund plucked some rye and munched it, 
the tilled land welcomed him in fellowship, every sight 
encouraged and befriended him, after his long wanderings 
under trees. The little path, the he-goat, the shrivelled, 
silvery cornflowers. Soon he would come to men and 
women. In a short while he saw a ploughed field, a crucifix 
planted at its edge, and he knelt beneath it and said a prayer. 

His path, round the bend of a hillock, led him out into the 
shade of a lime, where he heard, with delight, a splashing 
stream, its waters tumbling out through a wooden pipe into 
a trough: he drank of this clear, lovely water, and saw with 
joy a cluster of straw roofs among elder trees, the berries of 
which were dark already. But better far than all these 
friendly sights was the lowing of a cow, as warm and kind 
as if it had been a human welcome. 

He spied about round, the hut from which the cow had 
greeted him. There in the dust before the house door, sat a 
little red-headed boy with light blue eyes : near him an 
earthen pitcher, full of water, and, with water and dust to¬ 
gether, the boy made mud-pies, his bare legs all smeared | 

90 I 


with his mud. Happy and solemn, he kneaded mud. 
watched it squelch out through his fingers, and made pellets 
of it, using his chin to help on the work. 

‘God keep you, little son,’ said Goldmund softly. But 
when the boy looked up to see a stranger he opened his 
mouth wide for a bellow, puckered hi,s little fisce, a,nd 
shinnied away through the house-door, roaring. Goldmund 
followed into a kitchen, where the light was so dim that he, 
coming from bright sunshine, could at first see nothing of it 
clearly. But, to be on the safe side, he gave Christian greet¬ 
ing to all the house. He got no answer, though above the 
bellowing an old, thin voice had begun to make itself heard, 
speaking to comfort the baby. At last a little old woman 
came through the dark, shading her eyes to see the st ranger. 

‘God keep you, mother,’ said Goldmund, ‘and may all 
the saints in heaven bless your good face. For many days I 
have met no human kind.’ 

The old woman eyed him with simple cunning. 

‘What is it you want ? ’ she asked uncertainly. 

Goldmund gave her his hand, and stroked hers a little. 
‘Only to say “God keep you,” little mother, and to rest a 
bit here in your kitchen, helping you to build up your fire. 
I would not say no to a bit of bread, if you could spare it 
me, though you need make no haste with that.’ 

He saw a bench, let into the wall, and sat down to rest, 
while the old woman cut a bit off her loaf to give the urchin, 
who now grown eager and curious, though ready still to 
burst irito sobs and run away, stood beside her, gazing up 
at the stranger. She cut a second bit, and gave it to Gold- 
mund. 

‘Thanks,’ he said, ‘God will repay you.’ 

‘Is your belly so empty ?’ she asked him. 

‘Not that, but full of bilberries.’ 

‘Well, eat then. Where did you come from?’ 

‘From Mariabronn; from the cloister.’ 

91 



‘Are you a shaveling?" 

‘No, but a scholar on my travels." 

She peered at him, halhjeering, half-simple, 'her head 
shaking a little, on her thin, tvrinkled old neck. She left him 
to munch a couple of mouthfuls as she led out the urchin 
into the sun again. Then she came back, all curiosity, to ask. 

‘Have you any nev7s?’ 

‘Little news, mother. Do you know old Pater Anselm? 

‘No. But what of him?" 

‘He is sick.’ 

‘Sick? And will he die?" 

‘Perhaps: who knows?’ 

‘Well, let him die if he must. I have my broth to cook. 
Help me to chop up my kindling.’ 

She gave him a log of pine, well dried at the hearth, and 
a hatchet. He cut her all the kindling she needed and 
watched her lay it on the ashes, hunched over them, bending 
and wheezing, till all her sticks of fireing were alight. In her 
own exact and secret fashion she piled up her pine-twigs on 
the flames; the fire burnt clear in the open hearth, and on 
it she set a big black pot, that hung from a rusty nail over 
the hearthstone. 

At her orders Goldmund went to the stream for water, 
skimmed off the milk from her pails, and then sat down in 
the smoky twilight to watch the dance of flames and, over it, 
the old woman’s bony, wrinkled face, in the red glow, com¬ 
ing and going. Nearby, through the wooden wall, he could 
hear cows, pushing and rubbing in their ,stalls. It all pleased 
him greatly. Everything here was fair and good, speaking 
to him of peace and a full belly: the lime-tree and the brook 
beside it, the leaping flames under the pot, the stir and 
snuffle of champing cows, and their clumsy rubbings against 
the wall. There were two goats besides, and a swine-stall, so 
the, old woman told him, away on the other side of the hut. 
She was the master’s grandam, she said, and great-grandam 
92 


to the little howling boy. Cuno was his name: he wandered 
in and out, but would say no word, and glanced up timidly 
at Goldmund, though he did not bellow any more. Then 
came the goodman and his wife, and were all amazement 
to see this stranger. The man was surly at first; he gripped 
the scholar’s arm mistrustfully, and led him forth to see his 
face by daylight. But then he laughed, gave him a clap on 
the shoulder, and bade him come in and break bread. They 
sat together, each dipping his bread into the milk-dish, till 
the milk ran low, when the goodman took the dish and 
drank the sops. Goldmund asked could he stay with them 
till morning and sleep as guest under their roof. No, said 
the man, there was no room for it, but out there was hay 
enough, and there he could easily make a bed. 

The wife had her little boy beside her, and took no share 
in their talk. But, as she ate, her eyes grew curious, and she 
could not look enough at this fair young scholar: his hair 
and eyes alike had caught her fancy; then she saw his fine, 
white neck, and the noble shapeliness of his hands, as they 
flew so deftly here and there. This stranger was a townsman 
and a noble; and so young. But what drew and charmed her 
most was his young man’s voice, which seemed to sing to 
her, warm in its notes, pleading gently, its sound as sweet 
as a caress. She would have liked to sit there long and listen 
to it. 

Their eating done the goodman went to work in his cow- 
stall. Goldmund had gone outside to wash Ws hands in the 
running stream, and now he sat on the low trough’s edge, 
cooling his face and listening to the waters. He was per¬ 
plexed; he had all he needed of these folk, and yet he did 
not want to leave them yet. Then came the wife with her 
pitcher, which she set down under the jet to let it fill itself. 
She said in a low voice: 

‘If you are still around here tonight. I’ll bring you out a 
bite for your supper. Over there beyond the long barley- 

93 





field, there lies the hay, and they won’t get it in before to¬ 
morrow. Will you be there still?’ 

He looked into her freckled face, watched her strong arms 
as she raised her pitcher, and felt all the warmth in her 
wide, clear eyes. He laughed and nodded his head, and she 
was already away, with her brimming pitcher, into the door¬ 
way. He sat on for a while, glad at heart, listening to the 
rushing brook and thanking her: then he entered the hut, 
sought out the goodman, gave him and the old granny his 
hand, and thanked them both. The hut reeked of smoke, 
soot, and milk. A minute ago it had been his home and 
shelter, now it was already a strange place. He greeted and 
left them. 

Away beyond the huts he found a chapel, near it a pleasant 
copse, and a group of strong old oaks, with turf beneath 
them. He lingered on in their shade, wandering in and out 
among thick stems. It was strange, he thought, how women 
loved, and truly they had no need of words. This woman 
had needed only one with him, to tell him the place where 
he should meet her, and all the rest was said without speech. 
How had she told it him? With eyes, and a certain note in 
her low voice;' and then, with .something else, some emana¬ 
tion, a tenderness shining through her body, a sign by whicii 
all men and women know without telling that they please 
each other. It was all as strange as some very subtle, secret 
tongue, and yet he had learnt it so easily. His heart leapt 
up to think of the coming night, longing for the time 
when he would know how this strong, yeiiow-haired woman 
could love, how her limbs would fc<J to his touch, and how 
she would move with him and kiss him: surely she would 
be very different from Lisa. ; . 

Where was Lk now, with her straight black hair, her 
brown skin, her quick, short .sighs? Had her husband beaten 
her yet? How. swiftly all that had come and gone; pleasure 
lay waiting on every highway, an ardent, passing joy, soon 

' '■. 94 '' . 


over. It was all sin, it was adultery, and not long since he 
would have killed himself rather than have such sin on his 
conscience. Yet here he was, awaiting his second woman, 
and his heart was clear, his mind at peace. Or rather, per¬ 
haps, not at peace, though it was not from lust or adultery 
that at times he felt uneasy and weighed down: it was 
something else, he could not give it a name - the feeling of 
some guilt he himself had done nothing to incur, some sor¬ 
row men bring into the world with them. It was perhaps 
what theologians define as original sin: the sin of being 
alive, that might be itl Yes, life itself has a kind of guilt in 
it; or, if not, why should so pure and wise a man as Narziss 
have submitted to penance like a felon? And why should he, 
Goldmund, even, be forced to .see this guilt, deep down in 
him? Was he not happy? Was he not sound and young, not 
free as any bird in the sky? Did not women love him? Was 
it not fine to know that he, their lover, could give to any 
woman he loved the same deep joy he knew himself? Why 
then was he not entirely happy? Why should this strange, 
deep sorrow sometimes rise in him, infecting his young and 
careless happiness as much as ever Narziss’ wisdom and 
chastity ~ this slight fear, this hankering for the past? And 
what was it that so often set him thinking, cudgelling his 
brains, although he knew well he was no thinker? 

Yet it was good to love. He plucked a purple flower from 
the grass, held it to his eyes, and peered into the tiny narrow 
chalice, over which the veins ran in and out, around little 
pistils, fine as hairs. How life moved, trembling with desire, 
as much in a woman’s lap as a thinker’s forehead! Oh, why 
must men know scarcely anything? Why could he never 
talk to this flower? But not even two men could really talk; 
for each to know the other’s thoughts they had need of a 
moment of special happiness, close friendship, and willing¬ 
ness to hear. No, it was fortunate indeed that love had such 
small need of speech, or else love itself would have been 

95 



bitter, full of misunderstandings and craziness. How Lisa’s 
eyes, half-shut in a thrill of pleasure, had seemed as though 
dying of their ecstasy, showing only a thin gleam of their 
whites through the slit in her trembling eyelids: ten thou¬ 
sand learned words, or words of poets would never be 
enough to tell that feeling. Nothing - nothing at all, could 
ever truly be spoken or thought of from beginning to end; 
and yet each of us was for ever longing to speak, each felt the 
never-ceasing urge to thought. 

He examined the leaves of the little flower, as they rose, 
one over another, along the stalk, so curiously and beauti¬ 
fully set on it. Virgil’s lines were beautiful, and he loved 
them, but Virgil had many lines not half so beautiful, so 
clearly and yet cunningly , wrought, so full of meaning and 
delight, as this spiral of tiny leaves along a stalk. How 
glorious, noble, and joyful a piece of work were any human 
being to make such a flower. But none could do it, neither 
hero, emperor, pope, nor saint. 

He rose when the sun was low, to seek out the place the 
woman had named to him. There he awaited her. It was 
good to wait, knowing all the while tliat a woman, full of 
love, was on, her way. , 

She came with a linen bundle, into which she had tied a 
great manchet of bread and a cut of bacon. She undid the 
knots, and set it out. 

Tor you,’she said to him,‘eat.’ 

‘Later,’ he answered her, ‘I am hungry for you, not for 
bread, Oh, show me the beauty you have brought me! ’ 

She had brought him his fill of beauty, strong thirsty lips, 
and gleaming teeth, strong arms, browned by the sun, 
though within her clothes, down from below her neck, she 
was white and tender. Of words she knew little, but deep 
in her throat could sing with a note of clear enticement, as 
she felt his touch upon her skin, his hands more sensitive 
and gentle than anything she had known in all her life, till 

9 ^ 


she shuddered with delight and purred like a cat. She had 
learned few sports, fewer than Lisa, but with marvellous 
strength she pressed her love, as though she would have 
crushed out his heart. She was full of greed, like a child, 
simple and, for all her strength, ashamed. Goldmund and 
she were very happy. 

Then she went from him, tearing herself away with a 
sigh, since she dared not linger, Goldmund sat on alone, 
happy yet sad. It was long before he remembered his bread 
and bacon, and fell to alone; it was quite dark. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 


Goldmund had long been a wanderer, seldom sleeping 
twice in the same place, everywhere desired and appeased 
by women, tanned by the sun, made thin by trudging 
and spare diet. Many women had left him at daybreak, 
many had gone in tears, yet often he thought: 

‘Why is it that none ever stays with me? Why, if they 
love me so that they break their marriage vows to s'till their 
need of me for a night, must they all go running back to 
their husbands, from whom mostly they fear to be whip¬ 
ped?’ 

None had truly begged him not to leave her, and not one 
to take her along with him: none, for the sake of love, had 
yet seemed ready to share his joys, and the need of a vag¬ 
rant’s life. Nor indeed did he ever long to propose it to 
them, or urge the thought on any of his loves, and, when he 
examined his own heart, he found that his freedom was very 
dear to him, and did not remember a single mistress so sweet 
he could not forget her with the next. Yet it seemed a little 
sad and puzzling that love should be so fleeting in every 
place, both his love and the love they bore him, and no 
sooner kindled than it died. Was there nothing more? Was 
it always and everywhere the same? Or did all the fault lie 
in him: was he, perhaps, fashioned of such a sort that, 
though a Woman might hanker for his beauty, she could 
wish to stay with him no longer than for a brief, wordless 
space on hay or moss? Was it because he loved as a vagrant 
and theyj secure in their homes,' were scared by the thought 
of homeless life? Or was the lack all his, a defect of beauty, 


for which, though women craved as for a doll, pressing it 
hard, they then ran back to their husbands, even though a 
whipping awaited them ? He could not tell. 

But he never tired of learning from women. True he was 
more drawn towards young maids, those maids too young 
to have a husband, and in these he might have lost himself 
for longing. But such maids were mostly out of his reach, 
the protected, the cherished, the shy. Yet from women also 
he could learn; each left him something of herself, a way of 
kissing, a gesture, the fashion in which she defended herself 
or gave. Goldmund would play at any game with them, as 
eager and pliable as a child, ready to give himself up to every 
enticement. His beauty alone would never have sufficed to 
draw them so easily: it was his way of making himself their 
baby, open in his mind, curious and innocent in his greed, 
his perfect readiness to comply with whatever a woman 
cared to ask of him. He, without himself having known it, 
was, with each love in turn, what she had dreamed of, the 
sure fulfilment of all her hidden longing; tender and patient 
with the one, eager and full of fire with the next, as fresh 
and innocent, at times, as a boy at the end of his virginity; 
at others all art, and all design. He was ready to play or 
fight, to sigh or laugh, to be very bashful, or shameless. 
He did nothing to which a woman was unwilling, nothing 
she herself had not first coaxed him to. It was this that 
many, of quick perceptions, could see or feel in him at once, 

and so they made of him their darling. 

Thus he learned much. Not only, within a short space of 
time, had they shown him many ways and arts of love, 
making him the master of wide experience. He had also 
learned to perceive the multiplicity of women: his ear was 
attuned to every voice, and with many its sound was enough 
to let him know to a hair her needs and amorous limitations. 
He observed, each time with more delight, the endless ways 
in which heads spring from shoulders, a forehead ends in 


99 



piled up tresses, a knee-cap moves beneath a gown. He had 
learned to feel in the dark, with stroking fingers, the many 
sorts of women’s hair, to distinguish one skin from another. 
Even then he had begun to perceive that perhaps this refin¬ 
ing of his senses was the true, hidden purpose of all his 
wanderings; that in this might lie his deepest thought, driv¬ 
ing him on from love to love, so that his faculty of dis¬ 
tinguishing and perceiving might grow ever finer and more 
multiple, and ever profounder for its use. Such may have 
been his deep intent, that he should get to master women 
and love in all their thousand modes and differences, as some 
musicians become the masters of three or four instruments, 
or of many. But what might be the purpose of all this, and 
whither it was leading him, he knew not. 

Though able enough to learn Latin and logic, for neither 
had he any surpassing gift: but for love, and die game of 
loving, he was gifted. Plere he could learn without pains, 
forgetting nothing, and every lesson sorted itself for ever in 
his mind. 

One day, when already he had been a year, or two years 
on the roads, Goldmund came to the castie of a rich knight, 
with two young daughters. It was late autumn, soon there 
would be frost after sundown, and last winter had given him 
a rough taste of it. His mind was a litde troubled by the 
thought of these coming months of frost, as he asked for 
food and shelter at the castle, since winter has no tenderness 
for vagrants. Here he was well received, and when the 
knight had learned that this vagabond had studied, and 
could read Latin and Greek, he sent for him to come , up 
from the servants’ table, and treated him almost as his equal 
His daughters sat with drooping eyes; the elder eighteen, her 
sister scarce sixteen; Lydia and Julia. 

Next day Goldmund wanted to go further. He saw no 
hope of gaining love from either of these fine, yellow-haired 
maids, and tliere seemed no other woman in the castle for 


whose sake he would have cared to remain. But the knight, 
when tlieir fast was broken, came to him, and led him aside, 
into a room furnished to suit a special purpose. The old 
man spoke modestly to the young one of his love of scholar¬ 
ship and books, showed him a box with the rolls of parch¬ 
ment he had assembled, and a desk he had specially caused 
to be built for his reading, with pens and sheets of the finest 
paper. This pious knight, as Goldmund later discovered, 
had been a,scholar from his youth, but had turned, forget¬ 
ting his scholarship, to the life of the world, and to the wars, 
till once he had received God’s bidding, in sickness, to forget 
his sinful past, and set out on pilgrimage. He had trudged 
to Rome, and even to Constantinople, returning to find his 
father dead, and an empty house, in which he had settled, 
taken, and since lost, a wife, brought up his daughters, and 
now, in the beginning of his age, set himself down to the 
task of writing a true account of all that he had seen on his | 
journeys. Of this he had even contrived the first beginnings, I 
but, as he admitted to the vagrant, his Latin had in it 
many gaps, and hindered him in all he strove to relate. He 
offered Goldmund new clothes and long hospitality, in ex¬ 
change for correcting what he had written. He must 
copy the beginning out afresh, and be of service for the 
remainder. 

It was autumn, and Goldmund knew what winter means 
to a vagabond. A new suit of clothes was not to be scorned. 
But what pleased his youth above all else was the thought of 
housing so long with the two young daughters, and, without 
another thought, he consented. In a few (Jays the house¬ 
keeper was ordered to open her wardrobe; in it lay a length j 
of fine brown cloth, and from this they made a dress and cap 
for him. The knight himself had wanted a black gown, cut 
as near a scholar’s gown as might be, but of that his guest 
would hear nothing, and knew how to make him alter his 
mind: so that now he had fine new clothes on his back, half- 




page, half-huntsman, and of a colour sorting with his com¬ 
plexion. 

With Latin, too, it all went smoothly. Together they read 
over what had been written, and not only did Goldmund 
set to rights all the many wrong words and mistaken case- 
endings of his master, but here and there would build up 
into fine rolling periods the short clumsy phrases of the 
knight, in solid construction, with clear consecutio tem- 
porum. The old man was overjoyed, and praised unstint- 
ingly. Each day they would spend at least two hours at work 



In this casde (which in truth was more of a farm, 
strengthened with certain fortifications) Goldmund found 
much to pass the time. He went out with the others on every 
hunt, and learned to shoot cross-bow from Heinrich, the 
huntsman, made friends with all the dogs in the place, and 
could ride a horse whenever he wanted it. He was seldom 
alone, either talking with a dog or a nag, or with Heinrich, 
or Lea, the porter’s wife, a fat old dame, with a man’s voice 
and a love of jesting; or else with the shepherd and the 
kennel-keeper. With the miller’s wife who lived beyond the 
gates he easily might have had his way, but from her he 
held aloof, playing the innocent. 

He rejoiced in the sight of the two young maids, of whom 
the younger was the fairer, and yet so coy and hard to please 
that she scarce would say a word to Goldmund. With both 
he was very courtly and reserved, yet both were ever aware 
of his proximity. The younger drew away, defiant from 
shyness. Lydia, her elder, adopted a strange demeanour 
with Goldmund, half of respect and half of mockery, as 
though he were some curious monster of learning: she 
would ask many eager questions of their way of life in 
cloisters, yet always with the hint of a jest in them,,and the 
scorn of a high-bred lady, sure of herself. He bent himself 
to every fancy, respecting Lydia as his liege, Julia as a holy 
102 




Htde nun, and whenever, in his tales and talk of the cloister, 
he could manage to lure on these two maids to sit longer 
than was their custom after supper, or when Lydia, in court¬ 
yard or garden, said a passing word and mocked him a little, 
he felt some advancement had been made. 

Autumn leaves clung late that year to the branches of the 
tall ash in the courtyard, and for long there were roses in 
the garden. Then, one day, came a visit; a neighbouring 
knight, with his dame and a squire attending them. The 
mildness of the season had lured them out on this unaccus¬ 
tomed jaunt, so far from home, and now they rode to the 
castle, craving hospitality for the night. They were wel¬ 
comed; Goldmund’s bed was shifted at once from the guest¬ 
room to the room where he did his scrivening, and his bed 
made ready for the newcomers. Some hens were slaughtered 
and a messenger sent for fish to the mill. Goldmund rejoiced 
in all this bustle and feasting, and could feel at, once how 
eagerly the strange lady eyed him. Yet scarcely, by her voice 
and manner, had she shown how he pleased and roused her 
longing than he saw too, with rising excitement, that 
Lydia’s whole demeanour to him had changed, how still and 
reserved she had become, how closely she watched him with 
the guest. When, at their festal supper, the lady’s foot be¬ 
neath the table began to find a way to Goldmund’s, it was 
not her sport alone that delighted him, but much more the 
silent anger and constraint with which Lydia sat, watching 
them both, with curious and glittering eyes. At last he could 
let his knife fall under the board, and so, in bending to pick 
it up, stroke the feet and legs of his new paramour: he rose 
again, and saw how Lydia paled, how she bit her lip, as he 
told his stories of the cloister, though he felt the strange lady 
to be less eager for them than for the voice and accent of 
the narrator. The others also sat listening: the knight, his 
patron, with great benevolence, the other with a wooden 
face, though even he took fire from the young man’s words. 

103 



Never had Lydia heard such eloquence: he had flowered, 
desire trembled in the air, his eyes shone, in his voice was 
all delight: he begged for love. This the three women felt, 
each in her fashion: little Julia in panicked defence against 
him, the knight’s wife radiant with pleasure, Lydia with 
pain in her heart; pain made of tlie deepest longing, her frail 
effort to shield herself against it, sharp jealousy narrowing 
up her face and smouldering behind her eyes. Goldmund 
felt all these emanations, the secret answers to his striving. 
They flowed back into him; love thoughts darted like birds 
about his head, birds that came to his hand and fluttered off 
again, fighting and pecking at each other. Julia after supper 
withdrew (it had long been dusk) with her rushlight in an 
iron sconce, as cold and quiet as a religious. The others sat 
an hour longer, the knights discussing the emperor and the 
bishops, while Lydia, with flaming cheeks, listened to all 
the merry, trivial talk spun out between Goldmund and the 
lady. Beneath its shimmering words they had cast a skein 
of intermingled glances and accents; little gestures running 
between them, heavy with love. Lydia breathed this air in 
greedily, shuddering as she knew, or felt, how Goldmund’s 
knee, under the table, brushed against the knees of the 
dame. Each touch ran through her like a blade. Later she 
could not sleep, but lay with a beating heart half the night, 
sure she had heard them together, completing, in her mind, 
what was forbidden them, seeing them lie clasped, hearing 
their kisses, fearing, even though she wished it done, that 
soon the stranger knight would surprise them, and stab this 
catiff Goldmund to the heart. 

Next day the sky was overcast; a damp wind sighed, yet 
the guests, refusing all persuasions, seemed very impatient 
to set off again. Lydia stood watching them mount; she 
pressed their hands and wished them God’s speed, all the 
while scarce knowing that she did it, since every sense was 
in her eyes, as she saw Goldmund’s hand at the lady’s foot, 


helping her to climb her palfrey; the hand gripped the foot, 
broad and firm, and for an instant it closed on the lady’s 
shoe. 

The guests had ridden away: Goldmund had to be off to 
his screening. Within half an hour he could hear the im¬ 
perious voice of Lydia, calling to the grooms in the court¬ 
yard, the clatter of hoofs as they led her pony from the stall. 
His master went across to the window, and looked out with 
a smile, shaking his head. Together they watched Lydia ride 
off. That day their Latin seemed to rust, and they made less 
progress than before, since the scholar was at pains to keep 
his mind on it. His master, with a friendly smile, dismissed 
him earlier than usual. 

Unseen by any in the castle, Goldmund led his horse into 
the courtyard, and rode into the teeth of an autumn wind, 
over brown moorland, faster and faster. He felt his horse 
grow warm beneath him, and its warmth firing his own 
blood. Over heath and moor, stubble and fallow land, grown 
about with shave-grass and sedge, he rode into the grey, 
fresh morning, past clumps of alders, through dark pine 
woods, and out again, on to brown, empty heath. On the 
brow of a hill far off, sharp against the pale, cloudy sky, he 
saw the little shape of Lydia, set high on her slowly canter¬ 
ing palfrey. He spurred on to reach her, but the instant she 
knew herself pursued, she whipped up and galloped away 
from him. At times she vanished, then he could see her 
again, her hair in the wind. He galloped after, like a hunter, 
his heart leapt as he urged his horse, with little soft words 
of encouragement, happily noting the country as he rode, 
the alders, the slanting fields, the maple-clumps, and the 
muddy brinks of pools, yet never losing sight of his quarry. 

When Lydia knew he was upon her she ceased her flight, 
and let her palfrey walk. She would not turn to her pursuer. 
Proud, to all seeming unaware of him, she went on as 
though alone, and nothing had happened. He drove his 





horse to come up with her, and the two beasts walked peace¬ 
fully together, though both they and their riders glowed 
with the chase. 

‘Lydia,’ he said to her gently. 

She would not answer. 

‘Lydia.’ 

Still she sat dumb. 

‘How fair to see you riding in the distance; your hair was 
like gold lightning behind you. Oh, you were beautiful. It’s 
a fine thought that you should fly before me: this has shown 
me first that you can love me a little. I did not know, and 
even last night I was still in doubt. Only now, as you were 
trying to escape me, have I suddenly begun to understand. 
My sweet, my beauty, you must be weary! Shall we rest 
ourselves?’ 

He swung to earth and caught her bridle, so that she 
should not run from him again: her face was pale as snow 
as she looked down at him, and as he lifted her down she 
started to weep. There she sat, struggling with sobs, 
valiantly, until she had mastered them: 

‘Oh,’ she began, ‘why are you wicked?’ It was hard for 
her to bring out her words. 

‘Am I so wicked?’ 

‘You are a lecher, Goldmund. Let me forget the words 
you have just said; they were shameless words, and it docs 
not beseem you to say such things to me. How did you ever 
think that I could love you? Let us forget them. But shall 
I ever forget what I saw last night?’ 

‘Last night? What did you see then ? ’ 

‘Oh, don’t feign so, and lie to me! All that you did last 
night was shameless and cruel, before my very eyes, with 
that woman. Goldmund, have you no shame? Why you 
even stroked her leg under the table - my father’s table - 
before me! And now when she is gone you come hunting 
me. In very truth you cannot know what shame is.’ 
io6 


Goldmund was already sorry that he had spoken before 
helping her from the saddle. What a fool he had been not to 
keep his mouth shut; words were not needed in love. 

He said no more, but knelt beside her and, since she 
looked so fair and sorrowful, soon found himself sharing her 
grief. Even he felt a little to be pitied. Yet, in spite of all she 
had said against him, he could see the love in her eyes. Even 
the grief on her trembling lips was love; her eyes he could 
believe more than her words. But she had been expecting his 
answer. Now, since none came, Lydia drooped her lip still 
further, her eyes bright with tears, gazed, and repeated: 

‘Have you no shame, then ? ’ 

‘Forgive me,’ he answered her humbly, ‘these are matters 
none should ever speak of. It was all my fault, so forgive me. 
You ask me if I have no shame. Yes, to be sure, I can feel 
shame: but I love, I love you, and love knows nothing of it. 
Don’t be angry.’ .j 

She seemed scarcely to hear him. There she sat, pulling 
a sad face, staring away into the distance as though she had 
been all alone. This he had never known before: it all 
came from words. 

Gently he laid his face against her knee, and at once her 
touch was as a salve to him. Yet still he was a little restless 
and sad, and she too seemed sadder than ever, sitting still, 
holding her tongue, and gazing far away beyond him. What 
heaviness now, and what discomfort! But her knee felt 
friendly to his cheek, and did not seem to long to thrust him 
off: his face, with closed eyes, lay against it. Slowly he 
drew its long, fine shape into himself, thinking with tremb¬ 
ling pleasure how worthily this young and delicate knee 
completed and set off the firm, beautiful arch of her finger- 
nails. He nestled close up against it, letting his cheek and 
lips talk in their fashion: at last he could feel Her hand, like 
a soft, shy bird, alight on his hair. ‘Lovely hand,’ he felt. 
How fearfully, like a child, she stroked him! He had often 

^ ''107 ■ , , 


studied her hands, and wondered at them, till he knew them 
almost as his own, with their long fingers, tapering down to 
the swelling, rosy hills of the nails. And now these tapering, 
gentle fingers spoke shyly and gently to his hair, their words 
soft, greedy, children’s words; they were words of love. 
Gratefully he nestled up his head and, with his check and 
neck, rubbed her palm. At last she spoke: 

‘We must go; it is time,’ 

He raised his head and looked up at her, softly kissing the 
slim fingers. 

‘Get up, please, now,’ she said, ‘we must go home.’ 

He obeyed at once: they stood up, mounted their horses, 
and rode. 

Goldmund’s heart was full of happiness. How beautiful 
Lydia was, how clear and tender, like a child. He had not so 
much as kissed her cheeks, and yet he felt so peaceful and 
satisfied. They rode hard, and only in the courtyard, almost 
at the castle door, did she turn, with a little start, to say to 
him: ‘We should not have come back together. How mad 
we are.’ Not until the very last minute, as already the .stable- 
boys came running, could she whisper in quick, burning 
words: ‘Tell me, did you sleep last night with that woman ?’ 

He shook his head several times, and fell to patting down 
his horse. That afternoon, when her father had gone out 
riding, the lovers came together in the workroom; 

‘Was that the truth?’ she asked at once, and he, without 
further speech, knew what she a,sked him. 

‘Then why did you play that horrible game to make her 
love you?’ 

‘It was for you,’ he said; ‘believe me I would rather ten 
thousand times have had your foot to stroke than hers. 
Yours never came to me under the table to ask me whether I 
could love.’ 

‘And do you really love me, Goldmund’ 

‘Oh yes.’ 

lo8 


‘But what is to come of it?’ 

‘How can I tell you, Lydia? What do we care. I can only 
be happy that I love you, and what will come of it never 
troubles me. My heart leaps up to see you ride, to hear your 
voice, and feel your fingers in my hair. I shall be full of joy 
when I can kiss you.’ 

‘Goldrnurid, a man may only kiss his Bride. And did you 
never think of that, then ? ’ 

‘No, I never thought of that. Why should I? You know 
as well as I that you can never be my bride,’ 

‘So that is it; and since you can never be my goodman, 
and stay for ever at my side, it was very wicked of you to 
speak of love to me. Did you really think you could entice 
me?’ 

‘I thought of nothing, Lydia, but you only. I think much 
less than you suppose. And I ask nothing, except that one 
day you should kiss me. We talk too much; lovers should 
never talk. I think you do not love me, Lydia.’ 

‘This morning you said the opposite.’ 

‘And you did the opposite then.’ 

‘I ? What do you mean ? ’ 

‘First you rode off as you saw me coming, and then I 
thought that you loved me. When you began to sob and 
weep I thought that you were weeping for love. My head lay 
on your knee, you stroked it, and I thought that was love. 
But now you will do nothing kind to me.’ 

‘I am not that wanton whose feet you stroked beneath dtc 

table. You seem only to know such women as that.’ 

‘No, God be praised, you are far more beautiful, and 
finer.’ 

‘That was not what I meant’ 

‘No, but it is so. Do you know how beautiful you are?’ 

‘I have my looking-glass.’ 

‘Did you ever look and see your forehead in it, Lydia? 
And your shoulders and your little finger-nails; and then 
109 


N.G.-6 



your knees? And have you seen how all these things belong 
to each other, how all has the same long, beautiful shape? 
Have you seen it?’ 

*How you talk, Goldmundl No, I had never seen it be¬ 
fore; but, now that you tell me, I can see it. Listen, you are 
a lecher, and now you come to make me vain?’ 

‘I wish I could make you very vain. But why should I 
want so much to make you vain? You are beautiful, and I 
want you to see your beauty, You force me to tell it you in 
words, but I could say it a thousand times better. With 
speech I have nothing to give you, With speech I learn no¬ 
thing from you, or you from me.’ 

‘What could I ever learn from you, then ?’ 

‘I from you, Lydia, you from me. Yet you refuse, you 
only want to love one man, the man who is to be your hus¬ 
band. He will laugh when he sees you have learned nothing, 
not even to kiss.’ 

‘So, master-scholar, you would give me lessons in kiss¬ 
ing?’ 

He smiled, although these words did not please him; yet 
behind the malapert false ring in them, he could feel the 
sudden longing in her maidenhead, and her struggle to keep 
off her desire. 

Nor would he an.swer her again. He smiled, holding her 
restless eyes with his, and while, although she resisted, she 
submitted to the enchantment within her, he bent hi.s face 
down slowly until their lips met. Then he pressed her 
mouth very .softly, and it answered him with the kiss of a 
little maid, parting, as though in agonized astonishment, 
when his lips refused, to let her go. Gently enticing he fol-. 
lowed her lips as they moved back, until, with hesitation, 
they met again, and he taught the enchanted, without forc¬ 
ing her, to give and return kisses, until, exhausted, she 
leaned her head against his shoulder. He let it rest there 
happily, savouring the long yellow hair, whispering little 
■ 'iio ■' ■' 


words of comfort to her, remembering how he, an innocent 
scholar, had been taught this secret once, by Lisa the gipsy. 
How dark Lisa’s hair had been, how brown her skin, how 
the sun had burned them, as the fading John’s Wort gave 
out its scent! But now, from what a distance the picture 
shone on him! Everything withered so soon, almost as soon 
as it had blossomed: Lydia slowly stood upright again; her 
face had changed, her eyes were wide and serious lover’s eyes. 

‘Goldmimd, let me go,’ she said. ‘Oh you, my love, I have 
stayed too long with you.’ 

Each day they found their secret hour together, and Gold- 
mund gave himself up to his new love. This maiden’s love 
danced in his heart and soothed him. Often she had only 
one thought; to keep his hands in hers for an hour together, 
look in his eyes, and leave him with the kiss of a child, At 
others she would kiss and kiss, yet, even then, he might not 
touch her body. One day, blushing very deep, with a 
mighty struggle against herself, to give him a great joy, she 
showed him her breasts: shyly she unlaced her bodice, to 
let him see the small white fruit concealed in it; when he 
had knelt and kissed she put it carefully away again, her 
cheeks, and all her neck, still crimson. They would talk, 
but after a new fashion, not as they had done on the first 
day, inventing many names to call each other. She told him 
of her childhood, her dreams and games. Often too she 
would say that her love was wicked, since she and Gold- 
mund never could be wed. She would speak of it in a low, 
submissive voice, and set this secret grief on her love like a 
gaud, or as though she had been wearing a black veil. 

For the first time Goldmund knew himself beloved, and 
not only desired, by a woman. 

Once Lydia said: 

‘You are so brave and look so merry, But deep in your 
eyes there is no merriment. There there is only sadness, as 
though your eyes could'see that there is no happiness, and 
HI 




nothing loved, or lovely stays with us long. You have the 
most beautiful eyes any man could have, and' the saddest. I 
think it must be that you are homeless. You came to me out 
of the woods, and one day you will go back to them again, to 
sleep on moss, and wander the roads. Where is your real 
home, then? When you go I shall have a father and sister, I 
shall have my turret-room with its window, at which I can 
sit and remember you: but I shall not have a home any more.’ 

He let her speak, and often smiled at her, although at 
times her words made,him sad. Nor would he ever comfort 
her with words, only with little gentle strokings, holding 
her hands against his heart, humming soft magic in her 
ears, as nurses comfort babes when they cry. Once Lydia 
said: ‘I would very much like to know what will become of 
you, Goldmund; and I often think of it. You will have no 
easy life, and not such a life as other men. Oh, how I wish 
you may be happy! I often think you should be a poet, 
whose head is full of dreams and histories, and who knows 
how to speak them in beautiful words. Or else you will 
wander through the world, and every woman you meet will 
love you, yet all the while you will be alone. Better go back 
to your cloister, to the friend of whom you tell me so much. 

I will pray for you, that you need not die alone in the forest.’ 

She could say such things in deepest earnest, with eyes 
that seemed not to see the world around her. But often they 
would be merry together, riding over the brown, autumn 
heath, she telling him riddles to make him laugh, or pelting 
him with sticks and acorms. 

One night Goldmund lay waiting for sleep, his heart 
weighed down with a new, poignant heaviness: it beat full 
and heavy, pregnant of love, heavy with restlessness and 
sorrow. He could hear November winds creak in the rood; [ 

he had long been used to lying a while before he slept, but ! 

now sleep refused to come to him. Softly, as his habit was ’ ■! 

at night, he wMspered a chauntto the Blessed Mary: ' 


TOta pulchraes, Maria, 

Et macula originalis non est in te, 

Tu, Icetitia Israel, 

Tu,advocatapeccatorum. 

This chaunt sank into his mind like a sweet music: but 
out there he could still hear the wind, as it told of restless¬ 
ness and wanderings, of winter forests, and all the rough 
adventures of vagabonds. He thought of Lydia, then of Nar- 
ziss and of his mother: his restless Heart was brimfull of its 
grief. 

Then he sat up with a start, and stared incredulous. The 
door had opened, and through the dark, in a long white 
shift, came Lydia, noiselessly moving across the flags, with 
bare feet, to reach his bed. She had closed the door very 
quietly, and now came over to sit beside him. 

‘Lydia,’ he whispered, ‘my white flower, my little doe. 
Lydia, how do you come to me?’ 

‘I have come,’ she said, ‘for a minute only. 1 only 
wanted to see how my Goldmund lies in his bed, my 
Goldheart.’ 

She stretched herself out beside him, and they lay still, 
their hearts beating hard. She let him kiss, let his marvelling 
hands go where they would about her, but more than this 
she still refused him. In a little while she put his hands 
gently away, kissed him on his eyes, stood up without a 
word, and stoic off again. The door creaked; the wind 
clamoured and pressed upon the roof, all was bewitched and 
full of mystery, of secrecy, sadness, threat and promise. 
Goldmund did not know what he thought, or what he 
should do. After a short, restless sleep he awoke again, to 
find his pillow wet with tears. 

In a few days the tender ghost came back to him, to lie at 
his side for a while, just as before. She whispered to him, 
held in his arms; she had much to say, and to lament. He 


112 


113 




listened tenderly, she lying with his left arm about her, 
while, with the right, he stroked her knee. 

‘Little Goldmund,’ she said, pressed close to his cheek, in 
a tiny voice: ‘it is so sad I cannot give myself. This little 
secret, our little happiness, will not last. Already Julia sus¬ 
pects, and soon she will force me to tell it her: or else my 
father will get wind of it. Should he find me here in your 
bed, oh little Goldmund, it would go ill with me. Your 
Lydia would have to stand and weep, look up at trees, and 
watch her little Goldheart dangling, and soon the wind 
would be sighing through him. Oh, run, my love - run at 
once; it were better not to let my father catch you, and tie 
you up, and string you to a tree. I have seen one hung 
already; a thief. I could never see you hang, little Goldmund, 
so run far away now, and forget me. Oh, you must never 
die, ray Goldheart, birds must never eat your blue eyes. Oh, 
no, my dear, you must go from me; and what shall I ever do 
when you are gone!’ 

‘Come with me, Lydia.’ 

‘That would be very fine,’ she smiled, ‘oh, it would be 
fine and merry to run off with you into the world. But 1 can¬ 
not do it. I could never sleep in the wood, and lie in fields 
with straws in my hair. I could never do it, and never shame 
my father. No, don’t talk; these are only fancies. I can’t do 
it: I could no more do it than eat off a dirty platter, and sleep 
in rags that crawled with lice. Oh no, we two are born to 
sorrow, and everything fine and beautiful is forbidden us. 
Goldmund, my poor little love, I shall end by seeing you 
hanged. And then I shall be locked up and sent to a cIoi.ster. 
My sweet, you must run far off, and sleep again with gipsies 
and peasants’ wives. Ah, got go ! before they take you and 
bind you. We can never be happy ; never.’ 

He stroked her knee very cunningly, and gently he 
touched her maidenhead. 

‘Litde flower. Wc could be so happy,’ 

114 


‘No,’ she said, ‘no, you must not I That is forbidden me. 
You, little gipsy, perhaps could never understand. But I am 
a ’wicked maid, and have done wrong. I bring shame on my 
whole house. Yet somewhere in my soul, though I do it, I 
am still as proud as l ever was, and into my pride there must 
be no breaking. You must leave me that, or I will not come 
again and lie beside you.’ 

Never had he refused a command, a wish, or any hint of 
a wish from her. He himself was amazed by her great power 
on him. Yet he suffered, his senses were unappeased, and his 
heart would often struggle against this bondage. Sometimes 
he strove to shake it off, and then with many fine words, he 
would pay his court to little Julia, though in any case it had 
now become most necessary to keep her in the dark as much 
as possible. 

Yet the very strength of this enchantment in which both 
the sisters held his senses had made him aware, to his 
amazement, of the difference between desire and love. First 
he had coveted both equally, had longed for both, but found 
Julia the sweeter of the two, the maid it would be pleasanter 
to lie with: he had courted both without distinction, ever 
keeping both in his mind’s eye. 

Now Lydia had him in her power: he loved her so that 
he even could renounce full possession of her. Her soul 
had grown familiar and beloved, in its childish gentleness 
and melancholy it seemed to him a part of his own. He was 
often surprised and overjoyed to see how her body expressed 
her essence. She would say or do a thing after her fashion, 
utter a judgement or a wish, and her words, with the form of 
her soul in them, seemed set in the very mould that informed 
her fingers and her eyes. These instants, like a revelation of 
the laws and basic forms by which her essence, both soul 
and body, had been devised, often aroused the longing m 
Goldmund to seize and retain some beauty of this design. He 
strove, on many sheets of paper, which, after, he would care¬ 
ts 


fully hide, to retrace in pen the outline of her head, her 
knees, her hands, the arch of her eyebrows, as he remem¬ 
bered them. 

Julia had become a danger. Well aware at heart of the air 
of love her sister breathed, though all her senses drew her 
to this paradise, her stubborn mind refused to give them 
leave. She teated Goldmund with strained hostility and cold¬ 
ness, though her eyes, at unguarded moments of curiosity, 
would stray and linger about his body. With Lydia she was 
often very tender: sometimes she would creep into bed beside 
her, hinting to her of love and carnal knowledge, all greed 
and silent curiosity, prying capriciously at this longed-for, 
and forbidden, secret thing. Then almost shrewishly she 
would hint that she knew Lydia’s secret and despised her 
for it. This lovely, capricious child, a delight and hindrance, 
darted upon the short joy of the lovers, spying them out in 
greedy fantasy, pretending at times that she knew nothing, 
at others making them see in her a danger. She had ceased 
to be a child, and become a power. Lydia suffered more from 
her than Goldmund, who only saw Julia at supper. Nor 
could it escape Lydia’s knowledge that Goldmund was alive 
to Julia’s beauty, since she often saw his eyes appraise her. 
She could not speak, it was all too hard, too dangerous. Julia 
must not be crossed and her anger roused. Alas, any day or 
hour might bring the discovery of their loves, the end of this 
hard-won, fearful happiness; perhaps a terrible end. 

Goldmund would often wonder why he had not long since 
run off again. It was hard to live as now he lived, his love 
requited yet with no hope in it, either of a blessed and lasting 
happiness or the short fulfilment which, till then, had never 
been withheld from his desires: and all the while in mortal 
danger. Oh,: why did he stay to bear all this; all these 
smothered longings and blind constraints! Were not such 
fine feelings and scruples proper to safe, legitimate, rich 
men, men living snug in their warm houses? Had not vag- 
Ii6 


rants the right to stand aside from all such courtesies and 
laugh at them? He had this right, and was a fool to seek a 
kind of home in this casde, and pay for it with so much pain 
and disquiet. 

And yet he lingered on and suffered willingly, finding a 
kind of happiness in his pain. It was hard and senseless to 
love in such a fashion, set about with traps and full of ob¬ 
stacles, yet it was glorious. The dark, sad beauty of this love, 
its craziness and hopelessness, had glory in them: each 
heavy sleepless night of unstillcd longing had its beauty: his 
days were all as full of rare delight as the tremblings of 
desire on Lydia’s mouth, the lost surrender in her voice, as 
she spoke to him of her love and fears. In a few weeks sor¬ 
row had entered her face, whose lines it gave him such 
pleasure to trace with a pen that, as he did it, this alone 
seemed of significance, and he felt that in these few weeks 
he had changed and grown older by many years; less cun¬ 
ning yet more deeply experienced; not happier, yet much 
richer in soul. He had ceased to be a boy any more. 

In her lost gentle voice Lydia said to him: 

‘You should not be sad for my sake, Goldmund. I would 
only make you happy and see you merry. Forgive me that I 
taint your heart with my grief. Each night 1 have the stran¬ 
gest dream. Always I seem to be straying in a wilderness, so 
dark and huge I could never tell you of it, and I go on and on 
through it, seeking you. You are never there. I know I have 
lost you, and so I must go on for ever to find you. Then 
when I wake I think: “Oh, how good to know he is still 
: with me, that I may see him still for a few more weeks or 
days; it is all one to me since I have him.” ’ 

One morning, soon after daybreak, Goldmund woke and 
lay awhile thinking. The images of a dream surrounded him, 
but without any sequence or meaning in them. He had 
dreamt of Narziss and of his mother, and still saw their 
shapes clearly before him. When he had shaken off these 






lingering figments he perceived a strange new light in the 
room, glittering with another sort of clarity through the 
little round window, set deep in its wall. He jumped out of 
bed and ran to look out: the window-moulding, courtyard, 
stable roof, and then the whole wide country-side beyond, 
shimmered blue-white, before his eyes, the first snow of the 
year spread over them. This contrast with his heart’s hot 
restlessness of the still, surrendered world, made him un¬ 
easy. How quietly, how touchingly and devoutly, did 
moor and forest, hill and ploughland, give themselves up to 
sun or wind, rain, snow or drought. With what fair and 
gentle pain ashes and maples bent under thdr white winter’s 
burden, Could men never grow as patient as these, never 
learn the secret of their tranquillity. He wandered forth, 
abstracted, into the courtyard, wading in snow, filling his 
hands with it; went across to the garden and peered through 
the high privet hedge at rose-bushes, laden with whiteness. 

For breakfast they ate a meal broth, all chattering of the 
first fall of snow. All, even the maids, had already been out 
in it. This year the snow was late, Christmas was near. The 
knight told of lands in the South where no snow fell. 

But what made this first day of winter unforgettable in 
Goldraund’s life did not take place till late that night. Lydia 
and Julia had quarrelled, though of this Goldmund knew 
nothing. When all was still and dark in the house, Lydia 
crept as usual to his bed, stretched herself out in silence at 
his side, close up to him, to feel his heartbeats. She was sad, 
full of fears for Julia’s treachery, yet could not bring herself 
to tell her lover, and cloud his mind with her grief. She lay 
still, close to his heart; from time to time he whispered and 
caressed her, running his fingers through her hair. Suddenly 
- they had not been long together - her body , shuddered 
from head to foot, and she sat bolt upright with open eyes, 
Goldmund himself grew scared as he watched the chamber 
door pushed open by inches, and a shape, which first his 

■ ii8 


terror did not recognize, creep across the stones to his bed. 
Not till it was close up beside them,'and hovering over 
them, did he see, with pounding heart, that it was Julia. 
She let a cloak, flung round her shift, slip to the ground. 
With a moan, as though she had been stabbed, Lydia sank 
back and clung to Goldmund. Then Julia, with joy and 
malice, though her words trembled as she spoke them: 

‘I will not lie all alone in my bed,’ she whispered. ‘Either 
you take me into yours and let us three lie close together, 
or I go now to rouse ray father.’ 

‘Well, come then,’ Goldmund answered, and flung back 
the coverlet, ‘or your feet will freeze to the stones.’ 

She crept in; he found it hard to make a place for her, 
since Lydia lay like death, her head in the pillow. Then the 
three lay side by side, Goldmund with a maid on either 
hand, and for a moment he could not banish the thought of 
'how, not so very long since, this would have seemed his 
heart’s desire. With reverence and fear, yet a secret joy, 
he felt Julia’s hip against his side. 

‘I had to see for myself,’ she began again, ‘how soft 
and downy is this bed of yours, to which my sister creeps so 
eagerly.’ 

Goldmund, to still her, gently brushed his cheek against 
her hair, his cunning hand stroking along her hip and 
knees, as men please cats; he felt her magic steal into his 
senses, reverenced her yet would brook no resistances. Yet 
all the while he strove to comfort Lydia, whispering little 
love-sounds in her ears, and slowly brought her to such a 
point that at last she raised her head and turned to him. 
Noiselessly he kissed her eyes and mouth, though his hand, 
as he did it, subdued her sister, and the strange peril of these 
moments rose to an unbearable pitch in his mind. It was his 
left hand taught him the truth, as it learned the quiet, the 
expectant beauty of Julia’s body, so that now he could feel for 
the first time, not only all the bitter delight and hopelessness 


of this love that held him bound to Lydia, but also how much 
foolishness there was in it. He should, so now he began to j 
think, as he gave his lips to one, his hand to t.he other, eitiicr 
force a surrender from Lydia, or leave them both, and go 
his way. To love her as he did, yet renounce her, had been 
too meaningless and unjust. 

‘My heart,’ he sighed in Lydia’s ear. ‘We suffer with no 
reason. How happy we might be, all three together. Let ii.s 
do what our blood demands of us.’ 

As she shuddered at this and drew away from him, hi.s de¬ 
sire leapt up to meet the other, :ind liis hand l:)(;gan to give . 
her such delight that she answered it in a long trembling 
sigh. When Lydia heard this it pinched her heart, as thougli 
some poison had been dropped in it. She raised hcnself up, j 

flung back the coverlets, started to her feet, and cried aloud: | 

‘Let us go, Julia.’ 

Julia trembled: the sudden shrillness of this cry, Initd 
enough to bring ruin on them all, had widted her to tlicir i 

danger, and she rose quietly, liut ( loldrnuiul, deceived and j 

wounded! in all his senses, had clasped her quickly as she 1 

rose, kissed her two breasts, and whispered lairning words: [ 

Tomorrow, Julia, tomorrow.’ j 

Lydia stood barefoot in her shift, lier toes pinched witli \ 

cold on the bare flags. She caughi: up Julia’s cloak and | 

flung it about her: in a motion of such humbleness and pain ; 

as, even in the dark, her sister eoiikl feel, and which moved j 

her heart, making them, friends again. Together they stoic | 

off on tiptoe. Goldmund lay, at odds witii hiin.self, scarce j 

daring a breath till the house was still as a grave. ■ | 

So these three were flung back from this strange* unnatunil I 

contact into sad meditations and lon(,:lines.s, since; t;ve'.n tlic j 

two maids, lying together, could not bring tliemseilveis to ,[ 

speak a word, and each lay there wIthe)Ut slexip, defiant and [ 

speechless. A spirit of strife and ill-luck, some dem(.in of j 

solitude, misrule, and the dire confusion of souls, seeaneel to j 


120 


have been let loose upon the house. Goldmund could get 
no .sleep until long after midnight, nor Julia until close on 
daybreak: Lydia lay watching, full of grief, till the pale day 
came stealing across the snow. At once she rose, put on her 
gown, knelt long before her little wooden crucifix, prayed 
till she heard her father’s step on the stairs. She went out 
to him and begged him to hear her. Without having made 
any effort to sunder two emotions in her mind, jealousy, 
and her care for Julia’s maidenhead, she had resolved to 
bring it all to an end. Goldmund and Julia were still sleeping 
when already the knight had heard from Lydia whatever she 
thought good to tell him. Of Julia’s share she did not speak. 

When Goldmund, at the appointed hour, attended his 
master in the workroom, he found the knight, as a rule clad 
in his frieze gown and slippers, and busy with their writing 
for the day, with his sword girdled on, in a leather jerkin; 
and he knew at once what this would mean for him. 

‘Put on your cap,’ the knight commanded, ‘I have a little 
way to walk with you.’ 

Goldmund took his cap from the nail, and followed his 
lord down the stairs, out over the courtyard, to the gates. 
Their feet crunched the lightly frozen snow: the morning 
red was still faint in the sky. The knight went on in silence, 
the young man at his heels turning back, now and then, to 
look up at the castle, the little window of his chamber, the 
snowy inclines of roofs and gables, till all had been blotted 
into the distance. Never again would he see that window or 
those roofs, never again his workroom or his sleeping place, 
never again the knight’s two maids. He had long since 
accustomed his rnirid to the thought of this sudden separa¬ 
tion, yet now his heart was full of anguish, and the parting 
seemed a bitter sorrow. 

For an hour they walked on thus, the knight leading, both 
in silence, and Goldmund began to consider his own fate. 
The knight was armed, perhaps he would strike him down, 
I2I 







and yet somehow he did not fear it. The danger was small; 
he need only take to his heels, and there was an old man, 
with his sword, helpless. No, he was in no danger for his 
life. But this silent walk behind the ceremonious old man, 
this dumb submission to be led, had grown more painful 
with every step. The knight halted at last. 

‘And now,’ he thundered, ‘you will go alone, always in 
this direction, and lead your vagabond’s life as before. If I 
ever see you near my house again I will have you shot to 
death with arrows. I want no vengeance. I should have been 
wiser than to let so young a man come near my daughters. 
But if ever you dare return, that is the end of you! Go now 
and may God pardon your sin.’ 

In the livid, shimmering brightness of the snow his face, 
with the grey beard, seemed dead and extinguished. He 
Stood there waiting like a ghost, and never once shifted his 
ground till Goldmund was lost to sight behind a hillock. 

The red gleam had faded out of the sky; no sun came up; 
thin lingering snowflakes swirled about him. 


CHAPTERNINE 

Goldmund knew this country from many rides. Away 
beyond that frozen pool stood a barn, owned by the knight; 
further, a peasant holding where he had friends: in one or 
the other he might have to seek shelter and a sleeping-place, 
and all the rest could keep till tomorrow. Little by little 
there stole upon him the old sense of freedom and fresh 
adventure, which for a while had almost been forgotten. 
True that on this surly winter’s day adventures looked 
frozen and uninviting, true they would be pinched, 
faihished, and difficult, and yet their hard, untrammelled 
necessity came as a kind of salve, almost a balm, to his 
blunted senses and all the confusion in his heart. 

He ran on until he was tired out. No more riding now, he 
said to himself. Oh, wide world! The snow had almost 
ceased to fall. Ragged lines of woods away in the distance 
seemed to mingle with the grey clouds above them, stillness 
to stretch on and on, as far as the end of the world. What 
had become of poor, frightened Lydia now? He pitied her 
from his heart, and thought with tenderness of her, as he 
lay down to rest by a frozen stream, beneath a bare, solitary 
ash. The cold pricked him up; he rose, stiff in every limb, 
and by degrees fell into a run, since the grey, dull light 
I seemed already fading. 

j He thought of nothing, as he tramped over empty fields. 

What was to be gained by thoughts or feelings, no matter 
how fair and tender they might be? He must keep warm, 

• and find some refuge for the night, keep alert, as a fox or 
I marten, in the rigour of this frozen world, and, if he could 

?' ' . ■ . 123 . 


not let himself perish in icy fields: nothing but that was 
worth considering. 

He turned in surprise, and peered about him, .since he 
seemed to hear a horse’s hoofs, far off. Had they sent out to 
hunt him down, then? He drew his little hunting-knife 
from his pouch, to case the blade in the wooden sheath. 
Then he caught sight of the di.stant rider, and recognized 
a horse from the knight’s stable. It cantered stubbornly 
in pursuit of him: any attempt to fly would have been use¬ 
less, so he waited, without actual fear, yet tense with expec¬ 
tation and curiosity, his heart beating faster and faster. A 
thought leapt into his brain. ‘How good if I could manage 
to kill this rider! I should have a horse, and so the world 
would be mine.’ But when he saw the horseman, Hans, the 
stableboy, with his light, watery-blue eyes and silly moon- 
face, he laughed at himself. He would have to have been 
made of stone to slay such a kind, honest simpleton. He 
greeted Hans as a friend, and gently patted Hannibal, his 
horse, which knew him at once, as he stroked down its 
warm, damp neck. 

‘Whither away, Hans ?’ he asked the lad. 

‘To you,’ grinned Hans, with flashing teeth. ‘You’ve 
tramped a bit already, haven’t you? Well, now I’ve found 
you, I can’t stay. I was only to greet you, and give you 
this.’ ■ 

‘From whom do you greet me ? ’ 

‘From Mistress Lydia. Ah, you’ve brought us a sour 
day, Magister Goldmund. I was glad to be able to get off 
for a bit. Master must never know I’ve come forth witii a 
message, or he’d string me up as soon as look at me. Well, 
take it, then.’ 

He held out a package to Goldmund. : 

‘Tell me, Hans, have you any bread in your wallet?’ 

‘Bread? I dare say there’s still a crust’ Fie rummaged 
and drew out a chunk of rye-bread. He turned his horse. 


‘How is it with Mistress Lydia?’ Goldmund asked. ‘Did 
she send you no message, nor a letter?’ 

‘No. I only spoke with her a short while. Bad weather 
at home, I tell you. The master walks up and down like 
King Saul. Well, I have this to give you, and no more, 
Master Goldmund. Now I must hurry back.’ 

‘Yes, but only a minute. Hans, could you give me your 
hunting-knife? I have only my little one. If wolves come 
out and - well, it would be better for me if I had a good 
knife in my hand.’ 

But of this Hans would hear nothing. He would take it 
very ill, he said, should any misfortune befall Magister 
Goldmund. But his jack-knife, no ~ he could never give 
that, no, not for gold, not even in exchange for a better one. 
Oh no, he could never give it, not if good Saint Genevieve 
were to ask it of him. Now he must urge his horse, he 
wished Godspeed, and he was sorry. 

They shook hands, and the lad rode off again, while Gold- 
rnimd stood looking after him, with an odd grief in his heart. 
Then he undid the package, pleased with the good, stout, 
neat’s-leather cords that bound it. It was a woven undershift, 
of strong, grey wool, and seemingly Lydia’s handiwork, made 
to his measure. Wrapped in the wool was something hard - 
a side of bacon - and, in the bacon, a little slit, and, stuck 
into the slit, a clear gold ducat. No letter came with all of this. 

He stood in the snow with Lydia’s gift, and hesitated: 
then he stripped off his jerkin, and pulled on the woollen 
shift, which warmed him, wrapping his cold body. Quickly 
he pulled his jerkin over it, and the ducat he hid in the 
deepest pouch, bound the leather strings tight round it, and 
went on his way over snowfields. It was time to seek out 
some sleeping-place, since now he was feeling very weary. 
He would not go to any peasants’ huts, although he might 
find a warm shelter fin them, and a bowl of milk to his sup¬ 
per: he had no wish to gossip, and answer their questions. 






He slept in snow, rose up at daybreak, and trudged over 
frost in a sharp wind, urged to forced stages by the cold. 
For many nights he would dream of the old man with his 
sword, for many days loneliness and sorrow would gripe his 
heart. 

In a village where poor peasants had no bread, but only 
millet broth to give him, he found a shelter, some few days 
later, at nightfall. Here new adventures awaited him. A 
woman, whose guest he was, dropped her child in the night, 
and Goldmund was present at the birth. They had roused 
him up from his straw to help them, although in the end they 
had no work for him, save to hold a rushlight, while the 
midwife did her business. That was the first birth he had 
ever seen and, suddenly made rich with a new experience, he 
stared with surprised and shining eyes at the face of this 
woman in labour. It seemed, at least to him, that what he 
saw in the mother’s face was worth the noting. Something 
he would never have looked to see was revealecl to him there 
in the torchlight. As this groaning mother screamed her 
pain, the twisted lines of her face differed little from those 
he had seen in the moment of love’s ecstasy, on the faces of 
the women he had clasped. True the look of agony in this 
face was more strongly marked, and therefore clearer than 
any of supremest pleasure. But what lay beneath was the 
same: the almost grinning drawing together of the features, 
the same glow, the same extinction. He marvelled much at 
his sudden thought: pleasure and pain can be as like as 
sisters. 

He had another experience in this village. For the sake of 
a neighbour’s wife, whose eye caught his on the morning 
following this childbirth, and who speedily heard his sup¬ 
plication, he lingered a second night in the village, pleasing 
her well, since this was his first appeasement, after all the 
deceptions and longing of many weeks. And this delay 
brought his adventure. Because of it, on his second day’s 
126 


sojourn here, he fell in with a tall, bold fellow, Victor, 
seemingly half-cleric, half-vagabond, who greeted him with 
a Latin tag, and proclaimed himself a wandering scholar, 
though long past the age for universities. This fellow, with 
his stubbled, pointed chin, met Goldmund with a kind of 
comradeship, a vagabond’s humour, which soon had won 
him a young companion. On Goldmund’s asking where he 
had studied, and whither his journey might be leading him, 
this strange brother ranted out the following: 

‘By my poor lost soul I have frequented enough high 
seats of learning. I have been in Paris and Cologne, and 
seldom has a more pregnant word been uttered on the true 
metaphysics of the horse-sausage than by me, in my dis¬ 
sertation at Leyden. Since then, amice, I have wandered, a 
poor scholar, through German lands, my little soul racked 
and tormented by unappeased hunger after knowledge. I 
have been called the peasant-wenches’ scarecrow, and my 
mystery is to instruct young harlots in Latin, and exorcise 
the sausages from their chimney-pieces into my belly. The 
King of Bohemia is my brother,and the All-Father nourishes 
us both, though in my case, I have the most labour of doing 
it, and, two days since, hard-hearted as are all fathers, he 
intended so to misuse me as to save the life of a famished 
wolf with my poor carcass. Had I not struck down that wolf, 
Master Colleague, you would not now have had the honour 
of making my reverend acquaintanceship, hi saecuk, sue- 
culorum, Amen.' 

Goldmund, still unversed in the gallow.s-humour of this 
sort, felt drawn towards something in this tough vagrant, 
although he misliked the harsh laugh in which the man 
applauded his own jests, and the long, unshaven face scared 
him a little. Still he was easily persuaded to take him as 
companion on the roads since, whether or no his tale of 
the slaughtered wolf had been a brag, two were always 
stronger and safer than one. But Victor refused to set out 
127 





again till, as he said, he had taught a little Latin to the 
peasants, so he quartered himself in the village for one more 
night. His way of going to work was not like Golclmund’s 
in all his wanderings till that time, when he a.sked for shelter 
in a village. Vict(jr slunk along from hut to hut, gossiping 
with a woman at every doorway, poking his long nose in 
stalls and kitchens, loath to go on his way until he iiad ttdten 
tribute at every house. He had tales of the wars in Italy for 
each goodwife, squatting beside her fire, and bawling out the 
song of the fight at Ikrvia, with a certain cure for the grand- 
dam’s falling teeth and rheumy legs,stuffing his jerkin down 
to the belt with nuts, shavings of [tear, and Irits of bread. 
He had been in every place, it seemed, and knew all know¬ 
ledge. Goldmund sat watching him open-mouthed, as he 
fought his unending fight for victuals, flattering some and 
scaring others, bragging.to set them gaj.iing, ranting Latin 
tags and playing the scholar, fuddling their wits with 
chequered knaveries, his sharp eyes straying all the wliile 
from face to face, noting each half-oiien cupboard, each 
loaf, the nail for every key. Young Goldmund saw that this 
was a seasoned vagabond, w(!athered to sun and freest, and 
one who had lived in many climes, gone cold and tiungry 
for many years, and so grown insolent and cunning, in the 
bitter fight for perilous, uncertain life. Sueli was the; end of 
those who stayed too long on the highways. Would he, too, 
be like it one day? 

Next morning they jogged out together and, for the finsf 
time, Goldmund had a cornjianion. By their third day he 
had learned many tilings, To satisfy the three first necd,s of 
vagrants; security from mortal daiigt;r, shelter from the 
cold, and a full belly, had grown less a thought, with Victor, 
than an instinct. Long years on the roads had taught him 
much, and so he was,past master of many arts; could tdl 
from imperceptible signs the nearness of any human habita¬ 
tion, even in the dark, or in deep .snow; knew to a hair 
128 


which place in a wood or field it were best to sleep or sit to 
rest in; could see, the very instant he entered a room, the 
exact degree of its owner’s riches or poverty, how good- 
hearted he was, or curious, or fearful His young companion 
listened eagerly, but when Goldmund once answered his 
advice by telling him he made a mistake to approach human 
beings with so much guile, and that he, although quite 
ignorant of these arts, had seldom been refused hospitality 
when he asked for it in friendly words, the tall, spare Victor 
laughed, and answered good-humouredly: 

‘Well, little Goldmund, you are in luck, no doubt. You 
are so young, and look so brave, and seem such a handsome, 
innocent seraph, that your looks make you worth keeping 
for the night. You please the women, and the men say; 
“There’s no harm in him. Why, he couldn’t so much as 
hurt a fly”. But, listen, my young friend, youth fades; the 
angel’s face gets a stubble on it; wrinkles come, and hose 
need patching, so that, before a man knows where he is, 
he has turned into an ugly, ill-looking guest, with only 
hunger in his eyes, in place of all the sweet, pretty inno¬ 
cence; and then he must know something of the world, or 
soon he’ll be lying out on the dung-heap, with every cur in 
the village to come piss on him. But I think you’ll not stay 
long on the roads. You have too dainty hands and fine yellow 
hair. You’ll soon creep off where you find you can have a 
better life, into some large, warm marriage bed, or some fine, 
fat little cloister, or a warm, snug scrivener’s room. Why, 
with that good cloth on your back you might be a junker.’ 

Still laughing he pa.ssed his hands over Goldmund’s jer¬ 
kin, who felt his fingers, touching and seeking in every 
pocket. He drew off, remembering liis ducat, Then he told 
of the knight’s castle, and how he had earned these good 
new clothes with his Latin, till Victor could not understand 
how he had left such a snug nest in midwinter, and Gold¬ 
mund, unused to lying, let him know a little of Julia and 
129 




Lydia. This brought these two companions their first quar¬ 
rel. In Victor’s eyes Goldmund had been a fool without 
his fellow, to run off so, with no more ado, leaving the 
castle and its maids in the keeping of their good Father in 
heaven. This must be remedied, and soon he would have a 
plan for doing it. Together they would seek out that castle, 
and though Goldmund, of course, must never show himself, 
Victor, his friend, would care for all the rest. He must write 
a little love-message to Lydia: with that as his warrant his 
friend would be welcomed, and by God’s wounds! would 
never leave the stronghold again without this or that in 
gold or gear as his recompense. And so he gossiped; till 
Goldmund, having refused, at last grew angry, and would 
not hear another word of the matter, or let Victor learn the 
knight’s name, or where his castle might be'situated. 

When Victor saw him so ruffled he laughed again, and 
feigned good-fellowship. ‘Well,’ he grinned, ‘bite all your 
teeth out if it pleases you. All I will say to you, young 
sir, is that you make us both miss a good catch, and that is 
not the way of a kind colleague. But you’ll hear nothing, it 
seems; you are a rich knight, and will ride back again, storm 
the castle, and carry off the wench on your charger. Boy, 
your head’s stuffed full with humours and foolery. All’s one; 
I’ll be content to jog at your side until our shoes freeze off 
our feet.’ 

Goldmund sulked until evening. But since, at sundown, 
they had no shelter, nor could see any trace of human kind, 
he was thankful enough to let Victor pick their sleeping- 
place, help him build their couch with pine-branches, and 
rig up a shelter by the wood’s edge, between two tree-trunks, 
against the wind. They munched good bread and cheese, 
out of Victor’s bulging wallet. Goldmund, now ashamed at 
his anger, showed himself tractable and helpful, offering his 
companion his woollen shift for the night, and undertaking 
the first watch, when they agreed to watch by turns, and 
130 


keep off wolves. The other lay down to sleep on their bed of 
twigs. For a while Goldmund leaned against a pine-trunk, 
very quiet, not to trouble his fellow’s sleep. Then, since he 
froze, he paced the wood. The circle of his steps grew ever 
wider; he looked up at the pointed tips of pines, like spears, 
thrust at the leaden sky, his heart a little sad and afraid of the 
deep, still, freezing night around him, as though his own 
warm, living heart beat solitary, in a world of never-answer¬ 
ing silence. Then he stole back, to listen to his sleeping 
comrade’s breath. Deeper than ever before, did he feel the 
disquiet of the homeless, who have set no wall of castle, 
house, or cloister, between themselves and the great fear; 
who go naked through a world of strangers and enemies, 
alone under icy, mocking stars, with prowling beasts, 
among the patient, resolute trees. 

No, he thought, he would never become like Victor; not 
if he strayed the roads his whole life long. Never could he 
manage to assume that vagabond’s defence against the fear, 
his sly, thief’s tricks, to hunt up a living; his bold, ranting 
kind of foolery, the mouthing gallows-humour of Bramarbas. 
Perhaps this trickster was right, and Goldmund could never 
be his colleague, never the completed vagrant, and would 
one day have to creep back to the shelter of walls. But 
whether or no, he would always know himself a homeless 
one, nowhere really secure and well-protected: the world 
would be a riddle to the end; a gruesome, fair, unanswerable 
riddle, and, to the end he mu.st listen to its silence, in the 
midst of which his heart thumped so wildly, and seemed so 
transitory and frail. A few stars glittered high above Him: 
no wind, though distant clouds seemed to drift. 

Victor did not wake for many hours since Goldmund had 
not ventured to rouse him. At last he shouted: 

‘Come, you must get some rest, or tomorrow you’ll be 
fit for nothing.’ 

Goldmund obeyed, lay on the branches, and shut his eyes. 

131 





He was worn out, yet no sleep came. His thoughts kept him 
awake, and a new sensation along with them, one that he 
himself could not explain, as though he were uneasy for his 
comrade. Nor could he understand how he ever brought 
himself to speak of Lydia to this mffian, with his strident 
laugh, his bawdry, and impudent beggary. He was enraged 
with Victor and with himself, and pondered with a heavy 
heart on his best means of parting company. Nevertheless 
he must have dozed, since suddenly he knew with a start, 
that Victor’s hands were fumbling on his body, straying 
here and there with quick caution, and thrusting into the 
pockets of his jerkin. In one lay his knife, in the other the 
ducat. Victor would steal both if he could find them. He 
pretended still to be asleep, and as if in the heaviest slumber, 
shifted his arm. Victor drew back. Goldmund, with fury 
in his heart, resolved to go from him next day. 

But when, perhaps an hour after this, Victor bent over 
him again, and began to rummage in his pocket, Goldmund 
grew cold for very rage. He lay quite still, but opened his 
eyes, and said scornfully: 

‘Go now! You’ll find nothing here to steal’ 

The thief, in terror at this, gripped Goldmund’s throat 
between his hands, who struggled, and strove to fling him 
off. But the other pressed down tighter and tighter, setting 
his knee against his chest. Then Goldmund, as his breath 
was extinguished, wriggled and tore with his whole body, 
made suddenly wary and alert, as he could not manage to 
break loose, by the instant fear of death that entered his 
mind. At last he brought his hand round to his pocket, as 
the grip tightened upon his throat, whipped the little hunt¬ 
ing-knife far out, and struck down, quickly and blindly, 
several times, on the kneeling Victor. An instant later 
Victor’s grip fell loose, and there was air again. Goldmund 
drew a deep, wild breath of delight, exulting in his rescued 
life. 


132 


Then he strove to scramble up, but the long thin comrade 
fell in a heap on him, crumpled, with a rattling groan, his 
blood streaming down on Goldmund’s face. Only then could 
he thrust him aside and rise. There, in grey light, the long, 
spare carcass sat hunched up, slippery with blood, when 
Goldmund clasped it. He raised its head: it dropped again 
like a soft, heavy sack. The blood still oozed from his nape 
and back, while from his mouth, in a wild sigh, that soon 
diminished, the life ebbed out of him. 

‘Now I have slain a man,’ thought Goldmund, and 
thought it again and again as he knelt above the dying Vic¬ 
tor, watching the pallor stiffen out his face. ‘Holy Mother of 
God, now I have slaughtered.’ He could hear his own voice 
saying the words. 

Suddenly to remain became unbearable. He caught up 
his knife, and wiped it on the woollen shift, still worn by the 
other, woven by Lydia’s hands to keep her love warm; 
sheathed it in its wooden case, and thrust it away into his 
pocket: sprang up, and ran off with all his might. 

This merry vagrant’s death was a heavy grief to him. 
Shuddering, as the sun arose, he cleaned all the blood from 
■off his body: for a day and night wandered aimlessly. It 
was hunger at last that spurred him up, and ended his 
remorse and terror. 

Lost in the empty snow-bound country, without shelter, 
path, or bite to stay his entrails, he grew wild and desperate 
at last, howling his need like a beast, sinking again and 
again, worn out; longing only to sleep, and die in the snow. 
But famine would grant him no peace. He ran madly on, 
avid to live, quickened and spurred by the bitterest hunger 
and despair, by soulless strength and wild desire, the sheer 
stark force of naked life in him. From juniper-bushes, laden 
with their snow, he clawed, with stiff blue fingers, the 
shrivelled berries, chewed up the bitter fruit, strewn with 
pine-needles, whose sharp taste maddened him, devoured 

133 









handfuls of snow to still his thirst. Blowing in his frozen 
hands, he sank down to rest upon a hillock, eagerly spying 
out the land. Only heath and woodland within sight, no¬ 
where any traces of men. Over him flew two ravens; he 
eyed them maliciously. No, they should not get him for 
their supper, not with an ounce of strength still in his legs, 
a spark of human warmth still in his blood. He stood up, 
to fight again with mighty death, ran on and on, while in 
the fevered exhaustion of this last effort, a thousand strangest 
thoughts possessed his mind, and he cracked wild jests 
with himself, half in his head and half in words. He shouted 
to Victor, whom he had stabbed, taunting him in harsh 
scorn of his death: ‘How is it with you, sly brother? 
Does the moon shine clear through your ribs yet? Are two 
foxes snuffling round your ears, lad? You told me once you 
killed a wolf. Did you bite out his throat or tear his tail off? 
So you wanted my ducat, you old guzzler! But you see 
little Goldmund was your match ~ eh, Victor, he tickled 
your ribs finely! And all the time you’d a wallet of cheese 
and sausage, you swine, you gormandizer.’ Such jests as 
these he proclaimed, howling and panting, mocking the 
dead, and crowing over him, laughing the fool to scorn, for 
letting himself be slaughtered like a fool, the poor knave, the 
silly swaggerer! 

Then he thought ho more of poor, lean Victor, since Julia 
seemed to run in front of him, just as she had left him that 
night. To her he cried out little love-words, tempting her 
with lewd, jocund cries, asking her body; let her come to 
him, strip off her shirt, and they’d go to heaven together, 
for one hour only before they died, an instant only before 
they stank and rotted. Begging her, enticing her on, he told 
of her little jutting breasts, her legs, and the rough, gold 
hair under her armpits. And again, as he stumbled on his 
way, in the snowy tuft-grass of the moorland, with stiff legs, 
and drunk with pain, triumphant with the flickering greed 


for life, he began to whisper to another. This time it was 
Narziss he talked with, telling him new thoughts, new jests, 
new wisdom. 

‘Do you fear, Narziss,’ he asked him, ‘has your blood 
run cold? have you not seen it? Yes, my friend, the world 
is full of death, he sits on every hedge, and stands in wait 
round every tree-trunk, so there’s no help to be got by 
building stone walls and dormitories, and churches, and 
chapels of ease. He’ll spy you out through any window; 
he can smile, he knows each of you so well, and at midnight 
you can hear him chuckle, calling your name outside the 
house. Sing your psalms and light up your tapers on your 
altars, hurry to your matins and vespers, gather your herbs 
in the stillroom, pile your books together in your libraries. 
Do you fast, amice^ Do you watch? None of it all will do 
you good: friend Bones will take it all away from you, 
strip off the flesh, and leave you rattling. Run, Narziss, 
make haste. There’s junketing out in the fields: run - only 
keep your bones together, man, they’ll fall apart unless you 
look to them. Bones won’t stay tight for any man! Alas for 
our poor bones! Alas for our poor soft gullet and belly, alas 
for our poor bit of brain under the skull. All that melts 
away like the snow. It all runs off to the devil, while crows, 
like black priests, croak on their branches.’ 

^ For long the wanderer could not tell what place he was 
in, or where he went - if he spoke, if he ran on, or lay on his 
face. He tripped on tufts, ran against trees, clutched, as he 
fell, at brambles, thick with snow. Yet the will to run from 
death was strongest in him, ever hunting him up, and urg¬ 
ing him forward, chasing the blind runner over his ground! 

When at last he fell in a long swoon this happened in the 
very same village where, some days back, he had met the 
wandering scholar, and held his rush-light over a groaning 
birth. Then he lay still; the folk carne out and stood,around 
him gossiping, but he could not hear them any more. The 

135 



woman he had pleased with his love knew his face again, 
and shuddered to see it, took pity on him, let her husband 
scold, and lugged Ids half-dead body into her cow-stall. 

It was not so long before Goldmund was on his feet, and 
ready to take the roads afresh. His long sleep, the warmth 
of the stable, the goat’s milk given him by the woman, had 
soon brought back the strength to his body. And all the rest 
was half-forgotten, his trudging at Victor’s side, the sad, 
frozen night under the pines, his fellow’s fearful end, his 
days in the wilderness. But though it had half-faded some¬ 
thing was left of it. Some fear he could never name refused 
to leave him, although he put it from him into the past: a 
terror, and yet a precious thing, sunk deep in him but still 
a part of his mind, an aftertaste, a lingering thought, an 
iron ring about his heart. In scarce two years he had learned 
all there was to learn of vagrants’ lives: solitude, freedom, 
the instinct to spy out beasts and trees, fleeting love, with¬ 
out any faith in it, need, bitter as death. For days he had 
been the guest of summer, fields, for days and months the 
guest of forests; days in the snow, and days with the fear of 
death on him. 

And in all the keenest, strongest feeling had been that he 
must fight off death; that, small and miserable as he knew 
himself, he yet, in this last desperate encounter, had felt the 
glorious, terrible hold of life in him. The echoes of this 
battle still rang through him, his heart was graven with it in¬ 
delibly; as deep a knowledge as that other, of the gesture 
and expression of desire, so like to those of the dying, and 
bearing mothers. 

How short a time since that mother had lain, groaning 
and puckering; how short a time since Victor had crumpled 
together with a groan; how softly, quickly, his blood had 
dripped! 

Oh, and he too, how those days of hunger had taught him 
to keep guard against death; how they had torn at his en- 
136 


trails, freezing him almost to ice! And how he had 
struggled against it all, striking death full in the face; with 
what mortal fear, what grim exultation, he had guarded 
himself! There was not much more to be learnt in the 
world, he felt. He might perhaps talk of it to Narziss. No¬ 
body else would understand: 

When Goldmund, on his straw bed in the cow-stall, came 
to his senses again for the first time, he missed the ducat 
from his pocket. Had he lost it in that terrible half-swoon? 
He pondered the matter long. He loved his ducat, and 
would not willingly have lost it. Money might mean very 
little, since he scarcely knew how to value it, but this gold- 
piece had grown dear to him for two reasons. It was the only 
gift of Lydia that remained, since her woollen shift, on 
Victor’s body, lay in the forest, stiff with blood. Then, above 
all, it had been this piece of gold he would not relinquish; 
for its sake he had struggled with Victor, and killed him 
for it. If now his ducat should be lost his cruel deed, in a 
sense, would have lost its meaning. After long cogitation he 
decided to speak his mind to the peasant-woman. 

‘Christine,’ he whispered, ‘I had a gold ducat in my 
pouch, and it isn’t there any more. ’ 

‘Oh, then you’ve noticed,’ she said, with an odd, tender 
smile, yet sly, which pleased him so that, weak as he was, 
he slipped an arm about her waist. 

‘You’re a funny lad,’ she said gently, ‘so fine and clever, 
yet so simple. Does any but a fool wander the roads with a 
gold ducat loose in his pouch? I found your ducat in your 
jerkin, as soon as I laid you in the straw.’ 

‘Did you ? And where is it now, then ? ’ 

‘Seek it,’ she laughed; and did indeed let him search a 
long while, before she showed him the place in his jerkin 
into which she had sewn his piece of gold. To this she added 
a whole string of good, sage, motherly counsel, which he 
forgot as soon as she gave it, though he never would forget 
137 





her lover’s service, or the sly, kind look in her peasant’s 
eyes. 

He strove to show her that he was grateful, and when, in 
a short while, he could take the roads again and was eager 
to get up and go his ways, she held him back, saying that 
soon the moon would change, and then the weather must 
certainly be warmer. So it was. When Goldmund went his 
ways the snow lay, sick and grey, on the roads; the air was 
heavy and damp, and spring winds moaned in the sky. 


CHAPTER TEN 


Once more the ice drove down the streams, and violets 
thrust up through the earth, scenting the air where leaves 
had rotted, and Goldmund trudged again through the pied 
seasons, his senses drinking their fill of woodland, moun¬ 
tain, and cloud, as he strayed from village to village, castle 
to castle, wench to wench, sitting to rest in the cool of many 
evenings, sad at heart, under lighted windows, where far 
off, in a gleam of candle-light, there shimmered, clear, re¬ 
mote and unattainable, all that the night can show to 
vagrants of this world’s comfort, happiness, and peace. 

Again and again it all returned - once, twice, thrice - all 
he had believed he knew so well. Yet each time he saw it it 
had changed: the long trudge over field and moorland, or 
on stony paths; the summer’s sleep in forests; the loitering 
up a village street, at the heels of wenches arm in arm, on 
their way back'from haymaking or hop-picking; the first 
shudder of autumn, and evil nip of early frost: it all passed 
and returned, like an endless particoloured ribbon across 
his eyes. 

Much rain and snow had fallen on Goldmund when he 
clambered one day to the summit of the steep side of a 
beechwood, full of light, yet thick already with clear, green 
buds, and above, through branches at the crest, peered down 
on another country-side, stretching away before him, re¬ 
joicing his heart, filling him with desire and expectancy. 
For days he had known himself near it, and had spied about 
for what he saw. Now, on this midday tramp, it had come 
when he least awaited it, delighting him and strengthening 
his longing. Fie looked down from between grey trunks 

139 




and gently-stirring foliage on the brown and greenish valley 
spread beneath, in its midst a wide, blue, glassy river. Now 
he would be done with field-paths, with straying here and 
there across the land in the mystery of forest and heath, 
with only very rarely any castle or some poor village to re¬ 
ceive him. There, through the valley, flowed the river and, 
stretching away along its banks, the finest, broadest, most 
famous highway in the Empire, with rich, fat country on 
either side, and rafts and galleons on its waters, while the 
road led on into fair villages, to castles, cloisters, and 
wealthy towns. 

And whoever would might walk for days along it, with 
no fear in his heart of losing it suddenly, in the thick of 
woodland, or in a marsh, as he might the wretched field- 
tracks of the peasants. Here was a new thing to please his 
heart. 

And by sundown he had reached a merry village, set be¬ 
tween the river and red vineyards, its fair timbers and 
gables striped in scarlet, with many arched doors to the 
houses, and narrow alleys, built up steps. A smithy threw its 
glow across the street, with a clear ring of hammer on anvil. 
The vagrant looked in every nook and corner, snuffing up 
the musty reek of wine and casks at tavern doors, the cool, 
fishy smell off the river-bank, visiting God’s house and His 
acre, not forgetting to spy out a warm barn for the night. 
But first he would beg his victuals at the priest’s house. 
There he found a fat rosy priest, who asked him of his life, 
which Goldmund told, adding a litde here and there, and 
leaving out whatever he felt unseemly. On this he was given 
an honest welcome and, with good fare and wine in his 
belly, had to pass the evening with the reverence, telling 
him stories of this and that. Next day he jogged on along 
the highway, beside him the river with its rafts, and barges 
laden up with merchandise, which he haled, and some took 
him a stretch of his way. Spring days sped past him, 

140 


crowded with images: villages, and little towns welcomed 
him, women smiled through garden trellises, or knelt on 
the brown soil and dug-in plants: girls sang at sundown in 
village streets. 

A young miller’s wench pleased him so greatly that he 
stayed two days in her neighbourhood to court her: she was 
always ready to laugh and chatter with him, and he longed 
to be a miller’s boy, and live in the mill with her for ever. 
He sat with fishermen, and helped the carters to feed their 
beasts and comb them, earning meat and bread, and a lift, 
for his pains. This friendly traveller’s world rejoiced him; 
he was pleased, after so much loneliness and deep medita¬ 
tion in the woods, to gossip with well-fed and garrulous 
people, eating his fill every day, after many months of spare 
diet. He let the smooth, gay stream bear him along and, the 
nearer they came to the Bishop’s city, the richer and jauntier 
grew the high road. 

Once, as night drew in, he loitered down a village street 
by the river’s edge, under fair trees, thick with their leaves. 
The river flowed calm and mighty, sighing, and lapping 
the bank beneath their roots: over a hillock rose the moon, 
glittering on the stream, and drawing out shadows from the 
trees. There he found a girl, who sat weeping. She had had 
a quarrel with her boy, now he had run ofl and left her. 
Goldmund sat beside her, hearing her plaint, stroking her 
hands, and telling her of the deer out in the forest, and she 
did not say no to a kiss. But then her boy came back to seek 
her, who had cooled down, and was sorry for their strife, 
found Goldmund sitting with his love, and flung himself 
on to him at once, pummelling him hard with both his fists. 
Goldmund had some trouble to beat him, but managed in 
the end to fight him off, and the lad ran cursing tlirough the 
village. The girl had long since run away. 

Goldmund, not trusting this peace, gave up all thoughts 
of finding himself a sleeping-place, and walked on half the 

141 



night by moonlight, through the quiet, silvery world, very 
content, rejoicing in the strength of his legs, till dew cleaned 
the dust off his shoes, and he, grown suddenly weary, lay 
down under the first tree to sleep. 

The sun had long been bright when somediing tickled his 
cheek and roused him. He brushed it off with a sleepy hand, 
turned over and settled himself again, but was soon roused 
up by this same tickling. There stood a girl looking down at 
him, and tickling his face with the tip of an osier switch. 
He stumbled up; they stood and laughed at each other, 
and she led him to a barn, where he might sleep better, if he 
would. They lay together for a while, till she ran ofif, and 
came back with a bowl of milk for him, warm from her cow. 
He gave her a blue ribbon for her hair, which he had picked 
up on the road a while since, and they kissed and tumbled 
again before he went further. Francisca was her name, and 
it grieved him to part from her. 

That night he begged for shelter at a cloister, and there, 
next morning, he heard a mass. A thousand memories came 
to life in him, born of the cool dank air from the vaultings, 
the clattering of sandals along the aisles. Most strangely he 
remembered his home in Mariabronn. When mass was done 
and the cloister church all quiet again, Goldmund still re¬ 
mained on his knees, his heart marvellously stirred. The 
night before he had had many dreams; now he felt a need 
to confess, and rid himself of his past, if he could do it; 
somehow to change his way of life, though how he could 
not truly say: perhaps it was only the cloister, bringing 
memories of his fervid youth in Mariabronn, and these had 
stirred his soul a little. He longed to assoil himself and do 
penance, telling of his many minor vices, but, above all else, 
of Victor’s death, which still lay heavy on his mind. So he 
found a Pater, to whom he confessed it all, and especially 
his cruel dagger-thrusts, into poor Victor’s nape and back. 
Oh, it had been long since his last confession; the number 

142 


and weight of his sins loaded him so, that gladly he would 
have accepted any pains for them 1 But this confessor seemed 
to know the lives of vagrants, and showed neither horror 
nor surprise, hearing him quietly to the end, gravely and 
gently warning and admonishing him, without once saying 
he would be damned. Goldmund stood up with a light heart, 
prayed, and said his penance, as the Pater had directed, at 
the high altar, and was already on his way out of the church. 
Then a shaft of sunlight streamed through the window into 
a side-chapel, and he saw a statue, which seemed so to speak 
to his heart and call him to it, that he turned as though to 
greet a love, and stood, struck to the heart, and full of rever¬ 
ence. It was a Blessed Mother of God, in wood, standing 
there so tranquil and tender, with her blue cloak spread 
from her little shoulders, her soft maiden’s hand stretched 
out to him, her eyes so bright, above the sorrowful mouth, 
her pure forehead curved in such living guise, so deeply 
lovely and half of earth, that he felt he had never before 
seen anything like it. He would never have done gazing at 
that mouth, at the tender, loving bend of the neck. 

He knew that something had sprung to life in him, some¬ 
thing half-known, and yet often seen in dreams, something 
he had longed for all his days. He tried many times to leave 
the statue, but again and again it drew him back to it. 
When, at last, he had torn himself free he turned, to find 
his confessor standing behind him. 

‘You think her beautiful ?’asked the priest. 

‘Unspeakably beautiful,’ said Goldmund. 

‘Many say that. And others that she is no true Mother of 
God, that she is too new-fangled and worldly for them, and 
everything about her false and overwrought. We hear much 
disputation on the matter. Well, she pleases you, and I am 
glad of it. She has only stood a year in our church; a donor 
of our house made us the gift of her. She is by Master 
Nicholas.’ 

143 


‘Master Nicholas: who is he? Where does he live? Father 
- oh, do you know him? Oh, I beg you, tell me what you 
know! He must be a great, wonderfully gifted man to be 
able to make a thing like that.’ 

‘I know very little about him. He is a carver in wood, 
who lives in our bishop’s city, a day’s journey off, and has 
great fame at his craft. Such artists are not usually saints, 
nor is he, I think, but certainly a fine and gifted man. I have 
often seen him,...’ 

‘You have seen him? What does he look like?’ 

‘My son, you seem to be bewitched by him. Well, seek 
him out yourself, then, and give him a greeting from Pater 
Bonifazius.’ , 

Goldmund poured forth his thanks. The Pater left him 
with a smile, but he stood on a while longer, held by this 
mysterious image, whose breasts seemed to breathe, and in 
whose face such pain and sweetness dwelt together that both 
were clutching at his heart. He went from the church trans¬ 
figured, out into a world utterly changed. Since his sight 
of this sweet and blessed Mother of God, Goldmund had a 
thing he had never known, a thing he had often smiled at, 
or envied, in others: an aim. Yes, he had an aim, and would 
reach it, and so, perhaps, his whole confused existence 
might take on new meaning and unity. The knowledge 
brought both joy and fear. The fair road was no longer what 
it had been, a playground, a good place to enjoy, and loiter 
in; it was nothing now but a road to the city; to the Master! 
He hurried on, and by sunset the city lay before him, its 
towers glittering above walls. He saw painted shields and 
chiselled escutcheons over the gates, ran under them with a 
pounding heart, scarce heeding the bustle of the streets, the 
mounted knights, the carts and litters. Neither knights nor 
'litters, city nor bishop, were of worth to him. He asked the 
first citizen at the gate to direct him to the house of Master 
Nicholas, and was bitterly grieved that he knew nothing of 

M4 


him. Then he came out on a square of lordly houses, some 
gilt, some painted and decked with images. Tall and mag¬ 
nificent over a doorway, was set the statue of a lansquenet, 
painted in strong and glorious colours. He was not so beau¬ 
tiful as the image in the cloister church, yet he stood with 
such an air, jutting his calf, drrusting his bearded chin into 
the world, that Goldmund almost knew for certain that 
here was a work of this same Master Nicholas. 

He ran into the house, fell down steps, knocked at doors, 
and so came into the presence of a gentieman, in a velvet, 
fur-trimmed gown, who asked him his business. He 
inquired for the house of Master Nicholas. What errand 
had he for him? the gentleman asked,,and Goldmund had 
pains to master himself, and answer merely he had a mes¬ 
sage for him. The gendeman named the street the Master 
dwelt in, but when Goldmund had found his way there it 
was night. Overjoyed, but sdll uneasy, he stood before the 
Master’s house, and would much have liked to go straight 
into it. Then he remembered that it was late, and he all be¬ 
grimed and sweating from his journey, so forced himself 
to tarry a little longer, though for a while he could not bear 
to go from the door. 

He saw light come into the window and, just as he was 
about to turn away, a figure came over to lean out of it, a 
very beautiful girl, with yellow hair, through which the 
light of the tapers, in the room behind her, shimmered down. 

Next day when the town was awake and noisy again, 
Goldmund washed his face, in the cloister where he had 
slept, knocked the dust off his clothes and shoes, and found 
his way back to this same street. Fie beat on the house-door: 
there came a serving-woman, who seemed unwilling to 
lead him straight in to her master, but he managed to soften 
her old heart, and in the end she led him through the house. 
In his little work-room stood Master Nicholas, a tall, 
bearded man in a leather apron; of forty or fifty odd, it 




seemed to Goldraund. He stared with sharp, light blue eyes 
at the stranger, and curtly asked what was his will. Gold- 
mund gave him greeting from Pater Boniface. 

‘And is that all?’ 

‘Master,’ said Goldmund, sick at heart, ‘I saw your 
Mother of God, out there in the cloister. Oh, I beg you not 
to look so unfriendly; it is sheer love and reverence brings 
me to you. You do not scare me. I have lived too long on 
the roads in frost and snow, and known too much hunger 
for that. There is no man in the world could make me afraid. 
Yet I fear you. Master.... Oh, I have only one great wish, 
and my heart is so full with it that it pains me.’ 

‘And what kind of wish may that be ? ’ 

‘To be your apprentice, and learn from you.’ 

‘You are not alone in that, young man. But I want no 
apprentices in my house, and already I have two journey¬ 
men to help me. Where do you come from, then, and who 
are your parents?’ 

‘I have none, and I come from nowhere. I was a scholar 
in a cloister, where I learned Latin and Greek. Then I ran 
off, and, since, I have lived on the roads.’ 

‘And what is it makes you feel you would be a wood- 
carver? Have you tried your hand at anything like it? Have 
you any drawings to show me?’ 

‘I have made many drawings and lost them all. Yet I can 
tell you why I would learn your craft. I have watched many 
faces and shapes, and afterwards thought of them. Some 
of ray thoughts have never ceased to plague me, and still 
they give me no peace. I have seen how always, in every 
shape, a certain form, a certain line, repeats itself; how a 
forehead seems to tally with a knee, a hip with a shoulder; 
and how the essence of all this is the very being and temper 
of the person, who alone could have such a knee, or shoul¬ 
der, or forehead. And this, too, I have noted, which I saw 
one night, as I helped a woman bear her child: that the 


sharpest pain and sweetest pleasure seem to have almost one 
expression.* 

The Master glanced keenly at Goldmund. 

‘Do you know what you say ? ’ 

‘Yes, Master, and so it is. It was just this which, to my 
own delight and commotion, ! found expressed in your 
Holy'Mother of God, and that is why I come to you now. 
Oh there is such grief in that pure face of hers, and yet all 
her pain is as though transmuted to smiles and joy. When 
I saw that it ran like a fire through me. All I had thought 
or dreamed for years seemed confirmed by it. Suddenly my 
dreams had ceased to be idle, and I saw at once what to do, 
and where I must go. Good Master Nicholas, I beg you 
from my heart not to turn me from you.’ 

Nicholas was surly still, and yet he had listened very care¬ 
fully. ‘Young man,’ he said, ‘you can talk astoundingly 
well of image-making, and at your age, too, I am amazed 
that you have such things to say of pain and pleasure. I 
should much like to sit out an evening with you, drink a 
cup of wine, and discuss all this. But hear you: to talk well 
and pleasantly together is one thing, to live and work to¬ 
gether for years, is another. This is my workshop, and here 
I work, I do not gossip. Here it matters nothing what one 
has thought, or how well he knows how to speak of it, but 
only what he can do with his two hands. You seemed to 
mean what you were saying, and so I will not send you 
packing at once. Let us see if there is anything behind it. 
Did you ever try to model in wax or clay ?’ 

At once Goldmund thought of a certain dream, dreamed 
by him a long while since, when he had made little clay 
men and women, that rose up and grew into giants. But he 
did not tell it, only saying humbly that he had never tried 
such a work. 

‘Good. Well, then, you must draw me something. There 
is a table, you see, and paper and charcoal Sit there and 

M7 





1 



draw. Take your time with it. If you please you can stay till 
midday or evening. And now we have talked enough, I 
must do my work; go and do yours.’ 

On the bench which Master Nicholas pointed out to him 
Goldmund sat down before the. drawing-table. He could 
not set to work at once, but remained, like a quiet and eager 
scholar, eyeing his master with timid reverence, who soon 
had turned away and forgotten him, standing, hard at work 
on a small clay figure. 

He was not as Goldmund had pictured him: he was 
grimmer, elder, and more decided, far less delightful and 
winsome; by no means happy. 

His sharp, inflexible eyes were on his modelling, .so that 
Goldmund, freed from his uneasiness, could carefully note 
the Master’s shape. This man, he thought, might also have 
been a scholar had he wished it; an austere seeker out of 
truths, given to a work which many predecessors began be¬ 
fore him, which one day he must leave to those that would 
follow; a hard, eternal work, into which the labour and 
devotion of generations had been poured. 

So he read this Master’s face. Much patience and pain¬ 
fully got learning, much thought on what wa.s known al¬ 
ready, humility, and ultimate doubt of the value of all 
human seeking, yet, with them, a belief in what he did, all 
could be seen in the outlines of the head. 

Yet again the shape of the hands belied it: between them 
and the face there was contradiction, These hands touched 
the clay they moulded with firm, but very tender, fingers, 
stroking it as a lover might his mistress, full of desire, of 
dainty, tender compulsion, greedy, yet never distingui,shing 
between what they took and what they gave, at once 
reverent and lustful, as sure and masterly in their motion as 
though from some very ancient, deep experience. Cold- 
mund, full of wondering delight, sat watching thc,se in- 
.spired, well-graced hands. He felt tempted to make a draw- 

148 


ing of Master Nicholas, but would not, because of this con¬ 
tradiction between his face and hands, which lamed him. 

When for close on an hour he had watched Nicholas at 
his work, striving to unearth the man’s secret, his mind full 
of questing thoughts, another image shaped itself slowly 
in him, coming to life before his soul: the image of the man 
he had known best, had loved and reverenced most in all 
his life. This image was a perfect whole, without any flaw 
or division in it, although it, too, was many-faceted, and 
bore on it the scars of a deep struggle. It was that of his 
friend, Narziss. 

Clearer and clearer its shape defined itself, printing its 
lines upon his thought, showing him the hidden law 
informing this beloved being: the fair head, chiselled by 
intellect, the controlled, beautiful lips, made firm-set and 
shapely to serve the spirit, the shadow of pain about the eyes, 
the lean shoulders, emaciated in their struggle against the 
flesh; the long neck, and gentle, lovely hands. Never since 
the day he broke from the cloister had Goldmund seen his 
friend so clearly, or known his spirit so complete. 

As in a dream, yet full of preparation and foresight, he 
began to make a careful drawing, with loving fingers strok¬ 
ing in the outline of the head, as it stood already in his 
heart, forgetting the Master, forgetting himself, and where 
he sat. He did not see how the light in the workshop slowly 
changed, or that Nicholas several times had glanced across 
at him. He finished his drawing, like a task imposed by his 
love, to raise up out of his heart, and fix for all time, the 
picture within him of his friend. 

Nicholas came over to the drawing-table. 

Tt.is midday and so now I go to dinner. Come with me if 
you like. You have finished something; let me see.’ 

He stood over Goldmund and glanced down, thrust him 
aside and took up the sheet of paper, carefully, in expert 
hands. Goldmund roused up from his dream, now stared 
149 








in apprehension at the Master, as Nicholas stood examin¬ 
ing his drawing, with a sharp gaze, through light blue eyes. 

‘Who is this you have drawn ?’ he asked after a while. 

‘My friend, a scholar, a young monk.’ 

‘Good. Now wash your hands. The fountain stands out 
there in the courtyard. Then we will go to dinner. The 
journeymen do not eat with us today; tliey have work to do 
out in the city.’ 

Goldmund hurried off obediendy, found courtyard and 
fountain, and washed himself. He would have given much 
to know the Master’s thoughts. When he returned, Nicholas 
had left the workshop, though he heard him move in the 
next room. When he came back he, too, had washed him¬ 
self, and now, instead of his leather apron, wore a fine 
doublet of cloth, and looked very fair and majestic in it. He 
led the way up a staircase; its banister-posts bore small 
carved angels’ heads in nut wood, over a landing where 
stood old and new wooden images, and on, through a plea¬ 
sant room, its four walls and ceiling of hard woods, to a 
laid table, set in the window. A young girl came running 
into the room. Goldmund knew her at once for the yellow- 
haired maid of the night before. 

‘Lisbeth,’ said the Master, ‘bring a fresh platter. Here’s 
a guest. His name is - but now I remember he never told 
it me.’ 

Goldmund named himself. 

‘Well, Goldmund, then. Is dinner ready f’ 

‘In a minute, father.’ 

She fetched the platter, and ran out again, but soon came 
back with the old serving-woman, who brought them their 
meat: hog’s flesh, lentils, and fine white bread. As he ate 
the father discussed this and that with his daughter, hut 
Goldmund sat dumb, eating little, and feeling very shame¬ 
faced and uneasy. The maid pleased him well ; a fine, high¬ 
bred maid, as tall almost as her father, but she sat as modest 
150 


and aloof as though she had been behind glass, not grant¬ 
ing either a look or word to the stranger. 

When they had done the Master said: 

‘Now I must rest for half an hour. Go back to the work¬ 
shop, or into the streets if you will, and then we will talk of 
this matter.’ 

Goldmund left him, with a bow. An hour or more since 
this Master had seen his drawing, and yet he had not said a 
word of it. And still half an hour to wait! He would not go 
back to the workshop, since he did not want to see his work 
again, but out into the little courtyard, where he sat on the 
edge of the fountain, staring at the tiny thread of water, 
which came sparkling and splashing from its mouth, down 
into the deep stone trough, wrinkling, as it fell, into fine 
waves, drawing a little air to the depths along with it, which 
for ever forced its way back, rising in pearly bubbles to the 
.surface. Perhaps, thought Goldmund, fear of death is the 
root of all our image-making, and perhaps, too, of all our 
intellect. We shrink from death, shuddering at our frail 
instability, sadly watching the flowers fade again and again, 
knowing in our hearts how soon we shall be as withered as 
they. So that when, as craftsmen, we carve images, or seek 
laws to formulate our thoughts, we do it all to save what 
little we may from the linked, never-ending dance of death. 

The woman from whom this Master drew his madonna is 
faded perhaps, or dead already: he, too, will soon be dead, 
others will live in his house and eat at this table. But his work 


will stand a hundred years from now, or longer still, shim¬ 
mering in the quiet dark cloister church, smiling with the 
same lovely mouth, as beautiful, young, and full of pain, 
He heard the Master’s step on the staircase, and ran back 


into the worl^op. Master Nicholas walked up and down, 
with a glance, from timettb tirne,.at;Gpldmund’Sidmwing, 
stood still, at last, at the? window,-and said,pn his dif'y grudg¬ 
ing fashion: ' j"' i •>.^ ^<' - 

.. 







‘The usage with our guild is this: that each apprentice 
should serve at least four years, and his father pay the 
Master a fee for him.’ 

Since here he paused Goldmund thought that Nicholas 
was afraid of his having no prentice-fee to offer him. In a 
flash he had pulled out his knife, slit the threads round the 
hidden ducat, and fished it up. Nicholas watched all this in 
surprise, and, when Goldmund tendered his ducat, began to 
laugh at him. 

‘Oho. Is that how you feel?’ he chuckled, ‘No, young 
sir, you may keep your gold-piece. I have told you how our 
guild treats its apprentices. But I am no ordinary master- 
craftsman, nor can you be any ordinary pupil, since such 
as they must enter the workshop by thirteen, fourteen, or 
fifteen years at latest; and for half his time, an apprentice 
must drudge for his Master, and do any labour he may be 
set to. But you are a grown man, and should, by your age, 
have been journeyman, long since, or Master even. We 
have never seen a bearded apprentice in our guild. Besides, 
as I said before, I want no apprentices in my house. Nor do 
you look the kind of fellow who lets himself be told to come 
and go.’ 

Goldmund was at the height of his impatience; each care¬ 
ful word was like another turn of the rack to him, they 
sounded unbearably tedious and pedantic. He cried out 
hotly: 

‘Why should you say all this to me, since you have no 
mind to make me your apprentice ? ’ 

The Master continued unmoved, as slow as before. 

‘I have considered your request for an hour, and now it is 
for you to listen patiently. I have thought of your drawing. 
It has its faults, and yet it is beautiful. If it were not I should 
have given you half a gulden, and sent you packing, and 
forgotten you. I would like to help you Become a carver, 
but, as I say, you cannot be my ’prentice. And whoever has 

152 


not done his apprenticeship can never be a journeyman of 
our guild, and so can never be made Master. This I must 
say to you at once. But, if you can live outside, in the city, 
you shall try your hand and learn from me as you may. All 
this must be without indenture, leaving us free on either 
side. Break a few knives, if you will, and spoil a few wood¬ 
blocks, and, if I see you arc no carver, then you must turn 
to some other trade. Are you content ? ’ 

Goldmund had heard with joy and shame. 

‘I thank you,’ he cried out, ‘from my heart. I have no 
home, and can live here among houses as in the woods. I 
see you would not have to answer for me. I hold it great 
good fortune to have you teach me, and thank you from 
my soul that you grant me this.’ 


H.0.-8 




CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Here in the city new sights surrounded Goldmund, and 
another life spread out before him. As this countryside, gay 
with its river and villages, had drawn him on and on with 
its enticements, so too the city held many promises. Though, 
deep in liis heart, his grief and wisdom were untouched, 
life with all her colours tickled his senses, captivating the sur¬ 
face of his mind. Round him, with all her arts, lay the 
Bishop’s city, rich in a hundred pastimes, with women to 
love, while ever-increasing skill sharpened his senses. With 
the Master’s help he found a lodging in the Fish-Market, in 
a guilder’s house, from w|iom, as from Nicholas himself, 
he learned the craft of working in wood and stucco, colour, 
varnish, and gold-leaf, 

Goldmund was not one of those luckless artificers who, 
though they bear within them the highest gifts, can find no 
right craft by which to express them. There are many such 
who, seeing all the beauty of earth, can find no way to give 
it forth again, and share with others what they have seen. 

To him it was easy as sport to use his hands, and attain the 
perfect deftness of his craft; as easy, as on a feast-day even¬ 
ing, to pick up lute-playing from a journeyman, or dance 
j on Sundays bn village greens. He had hardships and dis- 
I appointments to surmount, was forced to spoil a few wood¬ 
blocks, and several times cut his fingers to the bone. But 
these early stages were soon passed, and he had his skill, 
even if the Master grew impatient, and chid him somewhat 
as follows: j 

‘It is good you are not my pupil and journeyman, Gold¬ 
mund - good that we know you are come from the forests, 

154 


I and that one day you will certainly go back to them. Any 

I man who did not know this of you, that you are no honest 

I craftsman and citizen, but only a strolling gipsy off the high 

j road, might be tempted to set you such tasks as any other 

1 Master asks of his men. You are a good enough workman 

j when it pleases you: but last week you idled for three 

I whole days, and yesterday, in die Casde workshop, where I 

sent you to polish the two angels, you lay and snored half 
theday.’ 

Such reproaches were just, and Goldmund always heard 
him in silence, without a word in his own excuse. He knew 
well he was no dependable, busy workman. For so long as 
any work held his mind, with such obstacles to surmount as 
could give him the joyous sense of his own skill, he was 
expert and zealous at his craft. But heavy drudging he al¬ 
ways loathed, and those many tasks which go to the making 
of a craftsman, which though not heavy in themselves, re¬ 
quire great pains and finnicking patience. These were an 
unsupportable burden. Often he wondered at himself. Had 
a few years on the roads been enough to make an idler of 
him? Was the nature he inherited from his mother begin¬ 
ning to master him altogether? Or what did he lack? He 
thought of his first years in the cloister, when he had been 
such an industrious, fervent scholar. Why had he been so 
patient in those days, so willing to give up his mind to Latin 
syntax and master all those strings of Greek aorists for 
which, at heart, he cared so little? He would often ponder 
this enigma, and his answer was that it had been love which 
steeled his will, and gave his industry such wings. His dili¬ 
gence had all been nothing save the deep longing to satisfy 
Narziss, whose esteem, he felt, was only to be gained by 
grateful industry. Then he would toil for days and hours to¬ 
gether to earn one smile of recognition, and this, when it 
came, had been ample recompense. Narziss had been his 
friend: yet strangely it had been this learned Narziss who 

■' ''155 




had shown him his inaptitude for learning and conjured 
up a beloved mother-image in his mind. So that, instead 
of learning, virtue and monasticism, the strongest primal 
urge in his nature had mastered him - lechery and carnal 
love, the longing to depend on none, and to wander. Then 
came Master Nicholas’ sorrowful Virgin, to reveal to him 
an artist in himself, with a new way of life, and fetters 
again. How were things with him now? Where would life 
carry him in the end? Whence came these obstacles in his 
mind? 

At first he could not understand himself, could only per¬ 
ceive that, deeply as he admired Master Nicholas’ skill, he 
felt for him nothing at all of the love which he had borne 
Narziss - that indeed he sometimes delighted to bait and 
cross him. Images from Nicholas’ hand, or the best among 
them, were to Goldmund the summit of all achievement; 
but Nicholas himself he did not reverence. 

Beside this artist who had carved such a Blessed Mother 
of God, with all the pain and loveliness of earth in her face 
- in the heart of this seer and sage, whose hands transformed 
to visible shape the deepest perception and experience, there 
dwelt a second Master Nicholas, the strict and sober father 
of a family, the widower, and Master in his guild, living a 
retired, narrowish life, with'his daughter and ugly serving- 
wench; a man for ever on his guard against the deepest 
urge in Goldmund, a master-craftsman, with the thoughts 
of a snug, prosperous citizen. 

Much as he might honour this teacher, never judge, never 
let himself question a stranger, a year in his seivice had been 
enough to show Goldmund all there was to be know:n of 
him, down to ithe minutest detail. This meant so much: he 
both loved and hated him, never let him out of his thoughts, 
forced his way with eagerness and mistrust, alert and thirsty 
after knowledge, into the secret places of his life. He ob¬ 
served how Nicholas kept neither apprentice nor journey- 

156 


man in his house, although there was room enough for 
both; saw how very rarely he went forth, and as rarely 
visited any guests. He watched his jealous passion for his 
daughter, how he strove to hide her from all other men - 
knew the living urge and desire, lurking behind this 
widower’s seeming continence, his strictness, and prema¬ 
ture old age; knew that when a commission caused him to 
■travel, he could, in the space of a few days’ journey, be mar¬ 
vellously transfigured and renewed. And once, in a little 
neighbouring town where they went to set up a carved 
angel, he had seen how one night on the sly, Nicholas crept 
out to visit a whore, and then for days was restless and ill- 
humoured. 

With these, at times, besides his eagerness to learn carv¬ 
ing, one other conjecture kept Goldmund closely watching 
his master, and it filled his thoughts. It was Lisbeth, the 
pretty daughter, that engrossed him. He could very seldom 
get a sight of her since she never showed her face inside 
the workshop. Nor could he decide if her prudish shrinking 
away from men were a quality implanted by her father in 
her, or verily a part of her nature. It was not to be blinked 
that Master Nicholas had never invited Goldmund to a 
meal. He did his best to surround his daughter with ob¬ 
stacles. Lisbeth was a dainty sheltered maid. There could 
be no hope of loving her out of wedlock; more, whoever 
wanted her as his bride must be the son of rich parents, a 
member of one of the higher guilds, and if possible own 
gear and a house. 

Lisbeth’s beauty, so different from that of vagrant women 
and peasants’ wives, had drawn Goldmund’s eyes to her 
that first day. There was something in her he never 
fathomed, an aloofness and mystery drawing him power¬ 
fully to her, and yet arousing all his mistrust. There was a 
deeply modest peace and virginity, a purity, but with noth¬ 
ing childlike in it, with a hint of cold reserve and pride, 

157 





under all her modesty and fair breeding, so that her inno¬ 
cence did not move and disarm him, but rather challenged 
and rasped his senses. No sooner had her shape begun to 
define itself than he felt the impulse to carve her form, not 
as she was, but as she might be, with awakened flesh, with 
desire and anguish in hen face, no little virgin but a Mag¬ 
dalene. He would often long to see her smooth, quiet, pas¬ 
sionless features become contorted and alive, till either in 
pain or pleasure, they yielded their secret. 

But another face had begun to shape itself in his heart, 
although it was still not altogether his, a face that his whole 
soul longed to capture, and hold in wood, but which still 
eluded him and veiled itself. 

This face was the face of a mother, though for years it 
had lost all resemblance to that vision which arose from the 
lost depths, at the end of his talk with Narziss. In nights of 
joy and days of wanderings long times of solitude and rest¬ 
lessness, danger and close proximity to death, this mother- 
face had slowly changed and renewed itself, become en¬ 
riched, more set in lus mind, more many-faceted. It was no 
longer his own dead mother that he saw, since her colour¬ 
ing and features, by degrees, were lost in an impersonal 
mother-image, a vision of Eve the mother of all mankind. 
As, in his Blessed Virgin, Master Nicholas had set forth 
the pitiful, sorrowing Mother of God, with a certainty and 
perfection of craftsmanship which his pupil felt he could 
never reach, so Goldmund hoped, when he had mastered 
the richness and surety of his craft, to shape an Eve, the 
mother of the world, as she dwelt already in the deepest 
sanctuary of his heart. This face within him was more than 
the memory of his mother, since that love was for ever de¬ 
veloped and transmuted. Now she had something of the 
gipsy Lisa in her aspect, something of Lydia the knight’s 
daughter, something of many other women, all harmonized 
in tlie one primal shape. And not only had all these faces 
158 


of well-loved women gone to build up its composition, but 
every pang, adventure, and fresh experience, completed it 
too, and had left in it traces of themselves. This form, if he 
could ever make it visible, should not be that of any creature 
he had known, but of life herself, the mother of all. Yet of 
her face and what it expressed he could have told nothing, 
except that in its lines he wished to realize lust and the joy 
of life, in their secret kinship to death and pain. 

Goldmund had learned much in a year, attaining great 
certainty of design, and from time to time, besides his wood¬ 
carving, Nicholas would let him model in clay. His first 
successful work was a small clay figure, three spans high; 
the sweet enticing shape of Lydia’s little sister Julia. The 
Master, though he praised this work, refused Goldmund’s 
wish to cast it in metal. It was too unchaste and worldly for 
Master Nicholas, who had no wish to be its godfather! 
Then came a figure of Narziss, whom Goldmund set out to 
carve in wood, as John the beloved disciple, since Nicholas 
wished, if it succeeded, to make it one of a group of the 
Crucifixion, commissioned for a long time past, at which his 
journeymen laboured unceasingly, leaving the last touches 
to their Master. 

At this Narziss-figure Goldmund worked, finding him¬ 
self again, his soul and best skill in what he did, whenever 
he had broken away from the workshop. And this would 
happen very often. Love, dancing, drinking, bouts with the 
journeymen, dice, and a brawl if he could find it, would 
tear him loose from the fetters of his life, till for days to¬ 
gether he shirked his craft, or stood all day idling and 
dreaming. 

But this figure of St John the Disciple, whose loved and 
pensive face emerged before him, clearer and clearer from 
the wood, he only touched at hours when he was ready for 
it, utterly self-forgetful and absorbed. Then he would be 
neither gay nor melancholy, think neither of lechery nor 

159 



the past. That first, quiet, happy gentle love with which, 
rejoicing in his discipleship, he had given his whole being 
to Narziss, returned to him again, with Narziss’ image. It 
was not he that stood before a wood-block, hewing out a 
portrait with his will; far rather it was the other, was Nar¬ 
ziss, who Used the skill in his hands to draw aside from the 
brittle transdence of time into the clear, abiding life of his 
essence. 

Only thus, thought Goldmund, at times in terror, could 
any real work be brought to birth. Such had been the birth 
of Nicholas’ unforgettable Virgin which, on many Sundays 
since first he saw it, he had trudged out to the cloister-church 
to visit. Thus, in this sacred, hidden fashion, had been 
carved the best of those old figures which Nicholas stored 
upon his landing. Thus, too, he would carve his second 
work, the sole and perfect shape within his heart, more 
reverent and secret even than this; his Eve, the Mother of 
all life. Ah, that such shapes alone might ever emerge from 
human hands; such sacred, necessary works, not blurred 
by any vanity or striving! But it was not so, he had long 
known it. Men could contrive quite different works of art 
- pretty figures, fashioned with intricate skill, their owners’ 
pride, the ornaments of church and council-house - pleasant 
toys, yes, but never holy, never the true-born forms of the 
soul! Not only had he seen many such, by Nicholas and the 
Masters of the Guild - toys, for all the grace of their con¬ 
ception, the skilful labour of their design - he knew, to his 
own regret and shame, had felt in his own, juggling hands, 
how carvers will put forth such trumpery, from idle pleasure 
in their cunning, vanity, and finnicking ambition. 

When first such realization came to Goldmund it brought 
with it the sadness of death. What was the use of being a 
carver, to make polished angels and such trash, no matter 
how masterly the workmanship.? Others perhaps might find 
their pleasure in it, handymen, fat, smug, prosperous citi- 
i6o 


zens, quiet little souls, easily pleased - it was not for him. 
For him all art and artistry were worthless unless they 
shone like the sun, had the might of storms in them - if 
they brought only pleasant, narrow happiness. He did not 
seek that. To gild some winsome Virgin’s crown, intricate 
as point-lace, with gold-leaf; that was not the work he had 
in mind, even though it happened to be well paid. 
What made Nicholas take so many orders? Why did he 
stand for hours so attentive to the wishes of burly provosts 
and councillors, come to bespeak a doorway or a rood-screen 
- so eagerly, with his measuring rod in his hand? He did 
it for two shabby reasons - he had set great store on being 
a famous craftsman with more orders than he ever could 
execute; and then because he wanted to pile up money; not 
money for great feasts and enterprises, money for the pretty 
Lisbeth, long since already a well-endowed young maid, 
money for her costs, for brocade and points, money for her 
nutwood marriage-bed with its shining coverlets and fine 
linen. As though the smooth disdainful child could not have 
learned love as well in any haystack I 

In hours when such things were in his mind his mother’s 
nature rose in the depths of Goldmund, with all the pride 
and scorri of the homeless for those who own, and live at 
ease. In such hours the Master and his handicraft sickened 
him like a taste of cold porridge and often he was near run¬ 
ning away. 

Nicholas, too, would angrily regret the trast he had 
placed in this shiftless workman, who often set his patience 
the sorest tests. Nor was he in any way appeased by what he 
heard of Goldmund’s life, his spendthrift ways, his brawls, 
his many women. He had taken a gipsy, an idle apprentice 
into his shop, nor did it escape his notice with what eyes the 
fellow watched his daughter. If, in spite of all, he showed 
more patience than came easy to him, it was born of no 
feeling of duty or care for the wastrel, but solely because of 
i6i 




his statue of St John the Disciple, of which he had seen the 
first design. 

Something he would only half-acknowledge, a kind of 
love and spiritual kinship, stayed Nicholas’ hand as he 
watched this spielmann ofi the highroads fashion in wood 
his figure from that drawing, at once so clumsy and so beau¬ 
tiful, so sensitive in its own queer fashion, for whose sake he 
had taken the fellow as his man - a carving only worked on 
by fits and starts, slowly and moodily, yet insistently. One 
day, Master Nicholas never doubted it, in spite of all these 
whimsies and obstacles, it would be finished, and would Be 
such a work as the greatest masters can put forth only once 
or twice in a lifetime. In spite of all that riled him in his 
pupil, no matter how he stormed and chided^ no matter 
how this gipsy’s ways displeased him - he never said a word 
of his St John. 

Gradually in these last years the freshness of Goldmund’s 
pleasant youth, that boyish grace that had won him so much 
favour on the roads, had faded and gone from him for 
ever. He was a strong, handsome man, coveted by every 
woman he met, and so not beloved of other men. His turn 
of mind and inward aspect had also ripened since the years 
when Narziss had roused him from the slumbering inno¬ 
cence of the cloister. Vagrancy and the world had shaped 
his spirit. Another Goldmund had long replaced the delicate, 
well-loved boy. Narziss had awakened him into life, 
women had given him their wisdom, vagrancy had brushed 
off his bloom. He had no friends, his heart wajs all for his 
mistresses; they could win him easily, one longing glance 
was enough. He found it hard to resist, had an answer to 
their lightest inclination. And he, who loved all gentle 
beauty, longing most of all for those women who came to 
him in the first sap of their spring, could still be held and 
stirred by the less beautiful, by women no longer lovely, 
or. very young. Sometimes, on village greens, he would stay 
162 


at the side of some old timid spinster, desired of none, who 
had won his heart by way of gentleness, and not of gentle¬ 
ness only, but an ever re-awakened curiosity. When once 
he had yielded to a woman - though his love might last for 
days or only hours - she became a beauty in his eyes, and to 
her he surrendered his whole heart. And soon experi¬ 
ence had taught him that every woman is beautiful and 
worth loving; that those least flaunting, the scorned of men, 
possess undreamed of ardour and self-forgetfulness, that 
withered virgins bear within them a tenderness as great as 
any mother, a sweet, confiding gentleness of their own - so 
that every woman in the world has her own magic, her own 
secret, which to read will bring happiness to a man, 

In this all women were alike. Every lack of youth or 
beauty found its recompense in some special gesture or tone 
of voice. 

But not all could hold him equally long. To the youngest, 
freshest of them all, he showed himself no whit more lov¬ 
ing, no whit more grateful, than to the ugly ones. Although 
he could never love by halves there were women who only 
rendered up their secret after three or ten nights in his arms, 
others who in a single night were fully known, and so for¬ 
gotten. Desire and love seemed to him the only satisfac¬ 
tions which can warm life, or give it any price. Of ambition 
he knew nothing; beggar and cardinal were alike to him. 
He despised all ownership, would not offer such things the 
smallest sacrifice, and threw his money away with both 
hands, now that he often earned as much as he would. 
Women and the game of the senses - these seemed to him 
the highest goods on earth, while the core of his days of 
brooding sadness, of every disgust and weariness of mind, 
was his knowledge of the passing of desire. 

The quick delighted flame of a passion, its short, wasting 
fire and sudden extinction - these seemed to him to con¬ 
tain the heart of all knowledge. To him they were the pat- 
163 


I 



tern of worth, of every joy in human life. He could let their 
sadness sweep across his mind, with its shudder of eternal 
endings, and surrender to that as fully as to love, since it too 
was love, it too was desire. As wantonness at the summit of 
his glory, knows of his own end and quick oblivion, knows 
that he will perish in the next breath, so is the innermost sad¬ 
ness of this drowned solitude sure of its resurrection in de¬ 
sire, in a fresh awakening of the senses in the lust of the 
eye, the pride of life. Lust and death were the same to Gold- 
mund. The mother of life might be called either ‘Lust’ or 
‘Love’, though her other names were ‘Death’ and ‘Corrup¬ 
tion’. She was Eve, the fount of death and joy, for ever bear¬ 
ing and extinguishing. Cruelty and love were as one to her, 
and her form, the longer he bore it in his heart, his holiest 
allegory and symbol. 

He knew, not in thoughts or words, with the sure, deep 
knowledge of the blood, that all his ways would lead him to 
the mother; to lust and death. The other, the father-side, 
of life, the intellect and will, were not his home. There 
dwelt Narziss, and Goldmund now, for the first time, had 
grasped all the reach of his friend’s saying, and,fe his heart, 
knew himself his opposite. With this new perception he 
carved his St John the Disciple: he might long until he 
wept for Narziss, dream of him the most splendid of liis 
dreams, he would never reach him, or be as he. 

With some kind of hidden intuition he also knew the 
secret of his artistry, his innate hankering to carve, his 
hatred, now and then, of all he had made. Without thoughts 
he could feel many comparisons. Art was the fusion of two 
worlds, the world of the spirit and the blood, the world of 
the father and the mother. Rooted in the grossest sense.9, she 
could grow to the clearest abstract thoughts, or take her 
origin in the rarest, incorporeal world of the intellect, to end 
in the solidest flesh and blood. All works that truly served 
their purpose - as for instance, Master Nicholas’ Sorrowful 
164 


Virgin ~ all these legitimate, true-born works of art, not 
jugglers’ pieces but true craftsmen’s - presented this same 
perilous, two-faced smile, this quality both of man and 
woman, the living together and intermingling of desire and 
the clearest, pas.sionless intellect. But more than any work 
yet born should his Eve set forth tliis double life, if ever he 
succeeded in carving her. 

In the carver’s craft there lay for Goldmund the assurance 
of reconciling his deepest contradictions. But art did not 
come as a free gift, certainly she was not to be had for the 
asking, she cost dear, demanding many offerings. For over 
three long years she had robbed him of his dearest joys, 
exacting the very breath of his life, all to which he clung 
besides desire, the freedom of his vagrant curiosity, his soli¬ 
tude, his dependence on no man. All had been offered up 
to image-making. Let others accuse him of surliness, call 
him sullen, feckless, disobedient, whenever he raged, and 
would not go to the workshop that day : for him this life 
was bitter slavery, chafing him, and poisoning his heart. It 
was not that he had a master to obey, not that he was in 
bondage without a future - it was art herself that riled and 
embittered him; art, that seeming goddess of the mind, 
who makes so many small exactions. She must have a roof 
above her head, needs carving tools, clay, wood-blocks, gold- 
leaf, colours; exacts industry and patience. To her he had 
given the savage freedom of the woods, all the boundless 
joy of the wide earth, the tang of danger, the pride of beg¬ 
gary. And, with growls and clenchings of teeth, he must 
offer them up again and again. 

Sometimes these holocausts were returned to him, He 
could find some slender compensation for the slavish order 
and discipline of his days in certain of the adventures that 
go with love; rivalry, and the brawls to which it leads. To 
be fallen on suddenly from behind, in a narrow alley on his 
way to a wench, or back from a dance, feel a few cudgel- 
165 



blows on Ms shoulders, turn in a flash to attack, not to de¬ 
fend himself, set his teeth, and clasp his panting enemy, 
strike up with all his strength under a chin, fasten his fingers 
into hair, or feel his grip press down into a throat - all this 
was good, and cured his surliness for a while. And women 
also had their pleasure in it. 

Pleasure filled up his nights abundantly, and gave some 
savour to his life, for as long as his work on St John the 
Disciple lasted. The work prolonged itself, till one by one, 
with patient ceremony, he put the last, dainty touches to 
face and hands. He had carved it in a small wooden shed, 
built behind the journeymen’s workshop. Then came the 
morning when it was ready. Goldmund went off to fetch a 
broom, swept the floor scrupulously clean, softly brushed 
the last traces of wood-dust from the modelled hair of his 
Johannes, and stood an hour or longer before him. 

Deep joy awoke in his heart, the rare delight of a new, 
overmastering experience, something which might repeat 
itself once in his life, or which he might never know again. 
A man on his wedding-day, or the day of his knighthood, 
might feel this: a woman delivered of her firstborn. A high 
dedication, a deep solemnity, with already secret terror of 
the instant when such strange perfection of happiness would 
be over, lived through, and fallen into its place, in the or¬ 
dered rut of everyday. There, before his eyes, stood Narziss, 
the friend who had led Mm out of his boyhood, clad in the 
robes and part of the fair disciple, with so quiet a look of 
pity and surrender, in the lines of his clear, attentive face, as 
might have been the bud of a smile. This lovely, radiant 
face, formed by the spirit, the lean, almost hovering body be¬ 
neath, the long, comely hands, opened in prayer, had 
known pain and death, although so full of youth and inner 
music. But despair, disorder, rebellion, they had never 
known. The soul behind these radiant, gentle features might 
be sad or gay, it was a harmony; it suffered from no rift or 
i66 


discord. Goldmund stood lost in his work. His thoughts, at 
first all reverent devotion to this monument he had given 
to his youth, ended in a cloud of care and heaviness. There 
stood his work: this fair Johannes would remain; his gentle 
grace was fixed for all time. But he, the maker, had lost it. 
Tomorrow it would not be Ms, would not grow and prosper 
under his touch. Even now it no longer needed the love of 
his hands, had ceased to be his refuge and comfort, the form 
and purpose of his days. He stood there empty. 

And so, he felt, it would be best to take his leave at once 
“ of St John and of Master Nicholas also; of this city, and 
the carver’s craft. There was nothing further for him here; 
he had no more figures ripe in his mind; his Eve, the mother 
of all, was still unattainable, and so she would remain for 
many years. Should he stay here, polishing angels’ heads? 

With an effort he left Narziss, and went across to the 
Master’s workshop, entered, and stood by the door in silence, 
till Nicholas noticed him, and called out: 

‘What is it, Goldmund?’ 

‘My St John is ready. Perhaps you will come yourself 
and look at it, before you go in to dinner.’ 

‘Gladly. I’ll come at once.’ 

They went over together, leaving the door wide-open, to 
have more light. For a long wMle now Nicholas had not 
seen the St John, letting Goldmund work on it undisturbed. 
Now he said nothing, but only carefully examined. His 
stern, secretive face lit up. Goldmund saw delight in the 
sharp blue eyes. 

‘It’s good; very good,’ said Master Nicholas. ‘This is 
your journeyman’s piece, Goldmund. You’ve mastered your 
craft. I will show this carving to the Guild, and ask that you 
be given your Master’s patent for it. And you’ll have earned 
it.’ 

Goldmund cared nothing for the Guild, but rejoiced, 
knowing how much recognition such words as these im- 
167 




plied from Master Nicholas, As the Master viewed his work 
from every angle, walking slowly round about it, he sighed: 

‘This image is full of peace and stillness, and, although it 
is sad, it seems to rejoice. One might almost say that the 
heart of the man who made it had been all happiness and 
delight.’ 

Goldimmd smiled; 

‘You know that in this I did not make an image of myself, 
but of my best friend. Master. It was he who brought the 
peace and light, not I. It is not really I who have shaped this 
figure, but he, who brought it to my soul. ’ 

‘It may be so,’ said Nicholas, ‘it is a secret how such 
figures as this are made. I am scarcely humble, but I’ll say 
this to you: I have made many works in my time that stand 
far below this St John of yours, not in care and skill, but in 
their truth. Well, you know it yourself, such a work can 
never be repeated. It is a secret.’ 

‘Yes,’ said Goldmund, ‘when this figure was carved I 
looked at it and said to myself: “You’ll never do another 
like it.” And so, Master, I think that soon I’ll go back to the 
roads.’ 

Nicholas gave him a puzzled, grudging look; his eyes 
were stern again. 

‘Later we can talk of that. This is the time when work 
should start for you in earnest, and truly not the moment for 
running ofi. But for today you can have a holiday, and at 
dinner you shall be my guest’ 

Goldmund presented himself at dinner, washed and 
combed, in his Sunday clothes. This time he knew how 
rare an honour it was to be bidden to dine with Master 
Nicholas. Yet, as he climbed the stairs and crossed the land¬ 
ing, crowded with its wooden figures, there was no such 
joy and anxious awe in him as when last, with a thumping 
heart, he had entered these pleasant, peaceful rooms. 

Lisbeth, too, was pranked out in her best, with a chain of 

i68 


jewels round her neck, and at dinner, besides their carp and 
wine, the Master had another favour for him: a leather 
purse, with two gold ducats, his wage for St John the Dis¬ 
ciple. Today he did not sit with his mouth shut, listening to 
the talk of father and daughter. Both had much to say, and 
they all clinked glasses: his eyes were busy with the maid, 
and he used his chance to the full to take a long look at 
her pretty face, with its high-bred, smooth, disdainful 
beauty. She was very gracious, yet he wished she could 
blush and thaw a little, longing as never before to compel 
this smooth, still face to answer him. He took his leave soon 
after dinner, paused for a while to examine tlie statues on 
the landing, and then, not knowing what to do, loitered 
about the city streets. He had been honoured past all hope 
by Master Nicholas. Why should he not rejoice? What 
made this recompense so mean ? 

Yielding to a sudden whim, he hired a horse and rode out 
to the cloister where first he had heard the Master’s name. 
Two years since then, and today they seemed an eternity! 
In the cloister-church he stood before the Sorrowful Virgin, 
and again her beauty caught and held him. She was a better 
work than his St John, equal in magic and profundity, surer 
far in knowledge and in skill. 

Now he noted details in the craftsmanship which only a 
carver could perceive, softly rippling lines in the mantle, a 
boldness in the construction of the long thin hands and 
fingers, the delicate use of accidents in the grain of the 
wood; and yet all these beauties were as nothing in compari¬ 
son to the loveliness of the whole, ithe inspired sim¬ 
plicity of the vision, only possible to some great master who 
had his craft at his finger-tips. To present such figures a man 
must have more than imagery in his soul; he must have both 
eye and hand consummately skilled. Therefore perhaps it 
was worth while to serve art for the whole of a lifetime, at 
the cost of freedom and all delight, if the end were one such 
169 



beauty as this, not only seen and lived, and conceived, in 
joy, but carved with the last and surest mastery. It was a 
hard question. Goldmund came back late that light, on a 
tired horse, to the city. The lights still shone in a tavern, and 
there he ate bread, and drank some wine. Then he climbed 
to his room in the Fish-Market, at odds with himself, weary 
and restless. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


Next day Goldmund could not make up his mind to work. 
He loitered about the streets in which he had spent so many 
unwilling days, watched serving-women and dames on their 
way to market, stood long by the Fish-Market brook, where 
vendors, with their lusty wives beside them, hawking and 
pricing their wares, clutched the cool silver fish out of their 
tubs, and flourished them at every passer-by. 

The terrified fish, with open gills and gold-filmed eyes, 
surrendered to death, or struggled and slithered in anguish 
to escape it, and, as often before, his heart was filled with 
pity for these fish and gloomy detestation of human beings. 
Why were those people so brutish, so raw, so unbelievably 
slow-witted? Had nobody eyes, neither men nor fish-wives, 
nor the cheapening burgesses around them? Why had they 
never seen these anguished gills, these eyes glazed, with the 
agony of death, these tail-fins, beating the air so wildly - 
or felt the bitter, desperate horror of this slithering fight 
against extinction, this last, unbearable transformation of 
lovely and mysterious fish, as a shiver ran along their dying 
bodies, and they lay, exhausted and limp, pitiful meals for 
the table of some'gluttonous burgess? These people were 
all blind; nothing ever spoke to them or moved them. A 
poor, beautiful beast might die in front of them, or a master, 
in some saint’s face, have revealed all the pain, the thought, 
the noble hopes, the dark, clutching fear in a human life, 
making of it a visible shudder ~ it all meant nothing; they 
could not see. ^ 

They were all so busy or amused, fussing and scurrying; 




bawling, cackling, belching in one another’s faces, clattering 
with pails, cracking their jokes, falling out over a couple of 
pfennigs: so glossy with civic pride, pleased with their own 
well-ordered lives, satisfied with themselves and the whole [ 

world. Swine! But no, far worse and lower than swine. | 

Well, although his life had seemed so pleasant here, he had | 

lived long enough with them and their kind, slept with their j 

wives and daughters, and made many a jolly meal of good j 

baked fish with them. Again and again, with all the sud- j 

denness of a charm, his peace and satisfaction had fallen | 

away. The glib illusions had been defeated, the smooth self¬ 
esteem and fatness of soul. Something kept urging him 
off into solitude, to long meditation and vagrancy, to the 
sight of grief and pain and death, and the doubtful issue of j 

all men’s striving; something had made him long to stare in- | 

to the gulf. I 

Often in his blackest desolation at this glimpse of vanity { 

and terror, sudden delight had flowered in his heart; a vio- I 

lent impulse to make love, draw, strike up a song; or else, as • 

he smelt a flower or played with a cat, his boy’s acceptance | 
of life had all come back to him. This time, too, it would all I 

come back, if not today tomorrow, or the day after, and the | 

world be as goodly as ever before. Yes, till the blackness | 

came again, the heavy, solitary pondering, his hopeless, | 

stifling love of dying fish or withered flowers, his hatred of j 

the swinish lethargy, the dull, ugly gapings of humati be- j- 

ings I Always, at such times as these, he would be forced, I 

with shuddering curiosity, to remember Victor the travelling I 

scholar, between whose ribs he had thrust his jack-knife, j 
whom he had left stretched out on leaves, dripping blood. I 

Then he had to think it all out afresh, wondering what 1 

Victor looked like now. Flad the foxes eaten him all up j 
yet? Could any traces still be left of him? Yes, there would i 
be something strewn there still - the bones, and then per- j 
haps a handful of hair. But bones? What happened to [- 
172 j- 


bones? How long did it take, years or decades, till bones lost 
their form and became earth ? 

Ah, he was forced to think of Victor now, as, sick at heart, 
he watched these fish, hating the market burghers and their 
dames. He was full of hatred of the world, hatred and pain 
within himself. Perhaps they had found Victor and buried 
him. If they had, had the flesh come off him yet? Was it 
still rotting away, bit by bit? Or had the worms got their 
bellyful? Was there any hair still on the skull? Were there 
eyebrows still above the eyes? And Victor’s life, so full of 
histories and adventures, fantastic games and japes and 
bawdry - how much remained of it now? Did anything 
save the few shabby thoughts still haunting his murderer’s 
mind, live on of him? Yet, as the world goes, this life had 
been no ordinary one. Was there still any Victor in women’s 
dreams? No, it was past and done with, and such must be 
the fate of each and all; we come to swift blossom and 
shrivel up, and then the snow hides us away. How his whole 
being had seemed to flower as, two years back, in restless 
longing to learn a craft, he had hurried along the high-road 
to this town, to lay his heart at the feet of Master Nicholas. 
Had anything of that still life in it? Nothing - no more life 
today than the long, spare carcass of that poor guzzler. Had 
somebody told him of a day when he would treat Master 
Nicholas as his equal, and demand his patent from the 
Guild, he would have felt he had all the joy of the world 
m his hands. Now it was stale and joyless as withered 
flowers. 

Suddenly, as he thought all this, Goldmund had the 
vision of a face. It came in a flash, and was gone again, one 
darting, quivering clarity, that vanished. It was the face of 
the earliest of all mothers, bent above the whirling darkness 
of life, looking down, with her sad, unchanging smile, all 
cruelty, all beauty in her eyes; smiling on births and deaths, 
on springing flowers and rustling autumn leaves, smiling on 

173 





art, and on decay. All things were alike to this great mother; | 

over them all her terrible, hovering smile hung like a moon. I 

The surly meditation of a Goldmund was as dear to her as 
dying carp, slithering on the cobbles of the Fish-Market, 
dear as the cool, disdainful, Master’s daughter, dear as 
Victor’s bones, strewn in the wood, who had longed so 
much to steal a ducat. 

Already the livid glow had died, the secret mother’s face 
was lost again. Yet still its paleness shimmered on, in the i 

very depths of Goldmund’s being, as a surge of pain, and ! 

life, and stifling longing, swept, breaking and lashing, i 

through his heart. No, he had no more use for the well-fed i 

pleasure of these citizens, fish-sellers, buyers, busy owners. j 

Let the devil take them! Ah, the white gleam of that full- j 

lipped smile of dying summer, around whose eyes the name- | 
less, heavy sheen of death had played like moonbeams or i 
autumn wind! i 

Goldmund went to the house of Master Nicholas. It was i 
midday or near; he waited till he heard tliat the Master liad i 

finished his work and gone to wash before he dined. Then I 

he went in to him: j 

‘Master, I have something to say to you. You can listen 
while you wash and change your jerkin. I am dry for a j 

mouthful of truth, and now I have things to tell you which j 

perhaps I can only say once, and never again, liiis is how | 
it stands with me, Master. I have to speak my mind to some- ! 
body, and you may be the only one in the town who could | 

ever understand what I mean. I do not speak to the owner i 

of the famous workshop, who receives so many honourable I 
commissions from every city and abbey in the land. I speak | 
to the Master who carved that Holy Mother of God out in i 
the cloister, the fairest virgin that I know. That is the man j 

I love and honour, and to be his equal seems to me the I 

highest good. I have just finished a work, my .St John, j 

and did not make it near so perfect as your Blessed Mother j 

174 i 


in that church. But let my work be what it is. I have no 
other waiting to be done. There is nothing in my mind that 
calls me, forcing me to shape it with my two hands. Or 
rather, no, there is another; but a very distant and holy 
image, that one day will constrain me to give it shape, and 
yet I cannot do it today. To have the power in me to make it 
I must know and feel far more of life, In three or four years 
it may be ready for me; or in ten, or longer still, or never 
perhaps I But, Master, till that time comes I cannot spend 
my days at handiwork, polishing angels, cutting rood- 
screens, living as a journeyman in this workshop, earning 
money, and growing like other workmen - no, I will not... 
I want to live, to wander the roads again! I want to 
feel summer and winter, and see all the beauty of the 
world, and I want to taste ray fill of its pain. I must know 
hunger and thirst, and forget, and free my mind of all I 
have learnt here. One day I want to make a statue which 
shall move men as deeply, and be as fair, as your own Holy 
Mother of God. But to be as you, and live your life.... I 
will not.’ 

Nicholas had wa.shed his hands and dried them. Now he 
turned and glanced at Goldmund. His eyes were sharp, but 
not malicious. 

‘You have spoken,’ he said, ‘and I have heard you. Let 
all that be! I do not expect you in the workshop, although 
there is so much to be done there. Nor do I consider you 
my journeyman. You need your freedom. I would like to 
discuss all this, and much besides, friend Goldmund. Not 
now, but a few days hence - and, meanwhile, do as'you 
please. Listen, I am much older than you, and have seen 
this and that in the world. I think in a different fashion, yet 
I understand what you mean. In a few days I will send to 
fetch you, and then we will discuss your future, for which I 
have made many plans. Patience till then! I know well 
enough how it feels when one has finished a work that lay 
175 




very close to tlie heart; I know that emptiness. It passes, be¬ 
lieve me.’ 

Goldmund took his leave dissatisfied. The Master meant 
him well, but what did he care.? He knew a place at the 
river’s edge. There, where the water was not deep, it came 
rushing on, over a bed full of rubbish and offal, since, be¬ 
yond the gates, the huts of the fishermen’s quarter emptied 
every kind of waste and flotsam in it. Thither he loitered 
now, straddled the river-side wall, and sat looking down in¬ 
to the stream. Water he loved, every sheet of water drew 
him to it; and from here when, through running crystal 
threads, that rushed and mingled, a man looked down, into 
the dark, indefinite river’s bed, he could see, here and there, 
some vague quick shimmer of gold gleam up at him; some 
half-seen thing - it might be the splinter of a dish, a .scythe- 
blade, broken and thrown away, a shining pebble, a glazed 
tile: perhaps at times it was a mud eel, a fat lote or a roach, 
wriggling down there, catching a sunbeam for an instant on 
fins, scales, or glittering belly; he could never be quite cer¬ 
tain what had glinted, and every time it was full of magic 
and delight, this muted sheen of buried gold, down in the 
wet, dark, unknown chasm. 

Every real secret, he thought, all the true-born pictures 
of the mind, were like this one small secret of water. They 
had no form, no clear, accomplished shape, would never let 
themselves be perceived, save as far-off lovely possibility; 
they were veiled and had many meanings. As there, out of 
the green river twilight, in tiny flashes, some indefinite gold 
or silver thing shone for an instant and was gone again, so 
could die passing outline of a face, half-seen from behind, 
become the herald of endless grace or endless sorrow; or as, 
under a loaded waggon at night, a lantern swung, and the 
giant turning shadows of the spokes spread out their dance 
over a wall, these,' in any one of their movements, might be 
as full of pictures and histories as Virgil. Of this same flimsy, 
176, 


magic stuff our dreams were woven in the night - nothing, 
with all the pictures of the world in it; a water in whose 
crystal the forms of all things, of angels, devils, men and 
beasts, lived as eternal possibility. 

His thoughts returned to the water; abstractedly, through 
the rushing, purling river, he saw formless shimmerings in 
the bed; shaped kings’ crowns, and women’s naked shoul¬ 
ders. In Mariabronn once, he remembered, he had dreamed 
such magic, ever-changing form into the shape of a Greek 
or Latin letter. Had he not spoken to Narziss of it? Ah, how 
long ago was that, how many centuries ago! Alas, Nar¬ 
ziss 1 To see him now, and talk an hour with him, holding 
his hand and listening to his quiet, level voice, he would 
willingly have given two gold ducats. What made all these 
things so beautiful, these glittering mysteries and shadows, 
all these unreal, enchanted forms - what made them all so 
unbelievably fair, since, in themselves, they were the oppo¬ 
site of any beauty craftsmen make? If the beauty of diese 
dim, unnameable things enthralled him only by its vague¬ 
ness, it was all the other way with the works of craftsmen. 
These were all form, speaking with the clearness of perfec¬ 
tion. Nothing was more inexorably clear than the lines of a 
well-drawn head, or a carved mouth. Precisely as he had 
seen them, to a hair, he could have shaped agam the eyes 
or underlip of Nicholas’ statue of the Virgin. There, there 
was nothing vague, tricking, impermanent. 

Though Goldmund pondered the matter long, in the end 
he could still see no good reason why these clearest, most 
defined of forms should work on our spirit in just the 
‘ fashion of these vaguest, least definite of all. But one thing 
was clear to him. He could see now why so many faultless , 
works, fashioned by the masters in their craft, displeased him 
utterly; why, in spite of a certain beauty in their design, 
they wearied him so he almost hated them. Workshops, 
churches, and palaces, were full of such fatal works of art; 

177 



N.C.-9 





lie himself had helped to make a few. Their bitterest decep¬ 
tion lay in this: that they roused men’s longing for beauty, 
and left it unsatisfied, since, in themselves, they lacked its 
essence - a secret. Dreams and the greatest works both had 
their mystery. 

And Goldmund thought: ‘The thing I love and hanker 
for is mysterious. I am on its track. I have seen it in flashes 
several times and, as a carver, when I can do so, I mean to 
shape it till it reveals itself. Its form shall be the form of the 
mother of all tilings. Her beauty, unlike that of other figures, 
shall not consist in any particular, no special roundness 
or slenderness, plainness or decorated form, winsomeness 
or strength, but in this - that in her the furthest oppo¬ 
sites shall be reconciled, living together in my work; birth 
and death, pleasure and pain, life and destruction; all which, 
outside her, could never make peace in the world. Had I 
taken her form from out of my mind, she would have been 
no more than any craftsman’s whim, and so my vanity 
would be worthless. I could see her faults, and forget her. 
But this primal mother is not my thought, since I have never 
known her with my mind. I saw her I She lives within me. 
Again and again I have met her shape. I saw it first in that 
village on a winter’s night, as I held my torch over the bed 
of a peasant-woman in labour, and, from that day on, she 
has been part of me. I lose her often, and then I seem to 
have forgotten her, till suddenly her image flashes up again, 
as it came today. That dearest of all my thoughts, the 
thought of my mother, has transformed itself. It has given 
life to this new shape, and informs it, like the kernel in a 
cherry,’ 

Now he could feel most clearly how matters stood with 
him, and his heart beat now, as it had at no other turning- 
point in his life. Today, no less than on the night when he 
bade farewell to Narziss and the cloister, his feet were set on 
a new road. This mother called : one day perhaps he would 
178 


transform her into a work for all to see. He could not tell. 
But this was certain - to follow her, be for ever on his way to 
her, feel her calling, leading him on, was good. That was 
his life. Perhaps he might never carve what he had seen; it 
would remain a vision to the end, a lure, the gleam of hid¬ 
den, sacred treasure. However that might be, he must follow 
it; to her he gave himself, she was his comfort. 

So that now the decision was upon him, and everything 
setded in his mind. Art was a very fine thing no douk, but 
art was no goddess, no final aim. He had not to follow art, 
but his mother’s voice. What use would it be to make his 
fingers more and more skilful? Master Nicholas had shown 
him where that led a man. It led to a craftsman’s fame, to 
money and a dull, snug life; to a withering and stunting 
of that essence by which alone the secret yields itself up. It 
led to carving petty, costly toys for every rich council-house 
and altar, St Sebastians, and neatly lacquered cherubs, 
gilded at four thalers the piece. The gold in a carp’s eyes, 
the lovely flicker of silver, round the edges of a butterfly’s 
wing, were endlessly more beautiful, more alive, more 
precious than roomfuls of such work. 

A boy came singing along the river’s bank, breaking off in 
his song from time to time, as he bit into a loaf of white 
bread. Goldmund hailed him, and asked for a bit of his 
bread. Then he pulled out the crumb with his thumb and 
forefinger, and rolled little white bread pellets. Leaning over 
the wall, he flung his pellets, one by one, far out into the 
dark hurrying stream; quick fish thronged round them, 
until they vanished into a mouth. Pellet after pellet he saw 
vanish, with the same deep satisfaction for each. Then he 
felt hungry, and went in search of one of his mistresses, the 
serving-wench in a butcher’s house, whom he called ‘the 
pork and sausage maid’. He would hail her with his usual 
whistle, tell her, when she came to the kitchen window, that 
he did not care what flesh she offered him. Whatever she 


179 






gave he would pocket it, and eat it in the vineyards across | 
the river, whose fat red soil glowed with grapes, and where, | 
in spring, there were blue sweet-smelling hyacinths. j 

But this seemed the day of fresh perceptions. When Katl> 
erine came smiling to the window - smiling her rather 
fat-faced smile - as already he raised his hand to give their 
signal - suddenly he remembered all her other smiles, all the 
other times he had stood just in this place, waiting at this 
window, just as today. And then, with wearisome distinct¬ 
ness, he saw it all before it happened; saw her answer his | 
sign and leave the window, come round in a trice to the 
back door to him, witli her packet of smoked meat in her 
hand, saw himself take it, and stroke her a little for her , 
pains, pressing her to him - just as she expected. Suddenly 
it ail seemed endlessly foolish, this whole, mechanical series 
of oft-done tilings. Why call them back and play his part in 
them; thank her for her sausage, and kiss her lips, feel her 
jutting breasts thrust out against him, pressing her a little | 

in exchange? In her good, plump face he could see a look ' I 
of soullessness and habit, in her friendly laugh hear some¬ 
thing bereft of dignity, something he had heard far too 
often, a clockwork sound, without any mystery in it. His 
smile froze; he dropped his hand. Did he still care anything 
at all for her? Had he ever really wanted her kisses? No, 
he had come here far too often, and seen the same smile far 
too often, always the same, and answered it far too often - i 
without desire. What yesterday he could have done without : i 
a thought, had suddenly, today, become impossible. The . ' [ 

maid still stood there peeping out at him, as already he : j 

turned his back, and went his way, resolved never to enter 
the street again. Let some apprentice stroke those breasts of 
hers. Let someone else eat her good sausage! Oh how these ; 
citizens guzzled away their lives! How lazy and dainty j 

were these provosts for whom, day after day, so many sows 1 

and calves were put to death, so many shining fish pulled | 

i8o -I 


out of the river. And he himself! How like the glossy fools 
he had become, how lazy and gluttonous! A bit of dirty 
crust on the moors, a dried-up sloe, tasted better than a 
whole Guild-banquet in this town. Ah, freedom of dark 
moors under the moon, traces of beasts, spied out carefully 
in the grey, wet grass of breaking dawns! These citizens’ 
life was all so flat and cheap - even their love. He had had 
enough! Life, like a bone, was emptied of its marrow. Once 
it had been better, had had some meaning in it, in the days 
when the Master was still his pattern, and Lisbeth a princess 
in his eyes. Even after that it had been tolerable, while he 
had his St John to hold his thoughts. Now it was over, the 
bloom was off it, the little flower had shrivelled up. Like a 
wave, the sense of impermanence overwhelmed him. 

Everything shrivelled, all pleasure ended in a breath, 
leaving nothing there but dust and bones. Yes, one thing 
stayed: the eternal mother. Eve the ever-young, yet ever old, 
with the sad, cruel smile of her desire. Again for an instant, 
he could see her: a giantess with stars in her hair, crouched 
dreaming at the edge of the world, idly plucking flower on 
flower, life after life, and dropping them slowly into space. 

While in these days Goldmund, in a melancholy dream 
of farewells, watched a part of his life fade out and perish, 
as he strayed through the withering city streets. Master 
Nicholas was taking endless pains to bind down the vaga¬ 
bond for ever. He had made many plans for Goldmund’s 
future, prevailed on the Guild to grant him his master’s 
patent, thought out a scheme to hold him fast, not as his 
journeyman but his equal, one whom he would consult on 
all great orders. Together they would make the designs, 
and Goldmund should have a share in the gain. There were 
risks in this, for Lisbeth no less than for her father, since 
naturally the young man must be his son-in-law. But the best 
of all the journeymen yet hired by him could never have 
made the new St John, and he, the Master, was growing 

i8i 


old, poorer in conceptions than he had been, and feared to 
see his famous workshop sink to the level of ordinary car¬ 
vers’ booths. It would not be easy with this Goldmund, but 
still the attempt would have to be made. 

So did the Master reckon, sadly and prudently. He would 
have the inner workshop rebuilt, and enlarged to house his 
new assistant; give him the attic floor in his house and a 
fine new doublet and hose to attend his election to the 
Guild, Tenderly he sounded Mistress Lisbeth, who, since 
that noon when they all had dined together, expected some 
such proposal from her father. And behold, Lisbeth had 
nothing against it! If the lad could be made a guildsman 
and a citizen she would not say no to him for a husband. 
Here, too, there seemed to be no obstacle. If Master Nicho¬ 
las and his craft had not quite managed to tame this gipsy, 
Lisbeth would soon have clipped his wings. 

So it was all contrived, and the lure well baited for the 
bird. And so, one day they sent for Goldmund, who had 
given them no news of himself, and this time, too, he was 
asked for dinner. He came as before, combed and in his 
Sunday clothes, sat down again, in the beautiful, rather 
ceremonious room, with the Master and the Master’s daugh¬ 
ter till, after dinner, Lisbeth curtsied and left them, and 
Nicholas made him his great offer. 

‘You understand,’ he added, at the end of his surprising 
scheme, ‘and I need not say that scarcely any other young 
man, with not even the usual apprenticeship behind him, 
has been made a Master as you have, and set down in such a 
warm nest. Your fortune’s made, Goldmund I ’ 

Surprised, and very discomfited, Goldmund sat staring 
at Master Nicholas. He thrust back the cup, half-full before 
him on the table. He had expected nothing from the Master 
save a few complaints for idle days, and the offer to make 
him his journeyman for ever. But now this ! It saddened 
him, and filled him with embarrassment, to sit and face the 
182 


man without a word. Yet he could not answer him at once. 

Nicholas, already a little vexed that no humble thanks had 
at once requited his generosity, stood up, and continued: 

‘Well, this seems to take you by surprise. Perhaps you 
would like some time to consider it. It irks me a litde that 
this is so. I had hoped to give you the greatest pleasure. But, 
for me, it’s all one. Take your time.’ 

‘Master,’ said Goldmund, seeking for words, ‘don’t take it 
ill of me. I thank you with all my heart for your kindness, 
and even more, for the patience you have shown me, your 
scholar. Never shall I forget my debt to you. But I need no 
time to consider. I made up my mind long ago.’ 

‘And to what?’ -- 

‘I had resolved it long before you sent for me - before I 
had any inkling of the noble offer I have just heard. I cannot 
stay here. I must go on the roads again.’ 

Nicholas paled, and his eyes glittered. 

‘Master,’ said Goldmund ‘believe me when I say I would 
not grieve you. I must leave all this. I must wander, and 
have my freedom. I thank you again'with all my heart, and 
let us take our leave of each other kindly.’ He held out his 
hand, almost in tears. Nicholas would not take it. His face 
was white. Now he began to pace the room, in quick, and 
ever quicker strides. But rage seemed to mount up 
through his body. Never before had Goldmund seen him 
thus. 

‘Go then I But go at once. Don’t let me have to look at 
you again. Don’t let me speak or do anything which one 
day I might have to be sorry for. Go! ’ 

Again Goldmund stretched out his hand, Nicholas made 
as though to spit on it. Now, pale as the other, Goldniund 
turned, stole from the room, put on his cap on the landing, 
crept down the stairs, stroking the nutwood angels as he 
went, and out into the little wooden shed, to take a. last 
farewell of his St John. There he stood for a while; then 
183 




left the house, with a deeper sadness in his heart than ever 
he had felt that day in the snow, when he had gone from the 
castle, and poor Lydia. But this, at least, had ended quickly. 
At least they had wasted no words. That was his one con¬ 
soling thought, as he crossed the threshold, and saw the 
streets take on the new look of familiar things, when our 
hearts have already taken leave of them. Fie glanced back 
once at the house-door ... the door of a stranger’s house, 
for ever closed to him. 

Back in his room, Goldmund made ready for the roads. 
There there was not much to hamper him; he had little 
else to do but take his leave. A picture he himself had 
painted, a gentle Madonna, hung on the wall, and many 
trifles strewed the room. There was a pair of dancing-shoes, 
a roll of drawings, a small lute, a row of clay figures he had 
modelled, some wenches’ gifts; a bunch of artificial flowers, 
a drinking-glass, stained crimson, an old, stale comfit, 
shaped like a heart, and more such 'rubbish, though every 
piece had its history. Once they had all meant something, 
now they were a tedious encumbrance. But at least he could 
go to the landlord, exchange the glass for a good, strong 
hunting-knife and whet it on the grindstone in the yard. He 
could crumble the gingerbread heart, and feed the hens in the 
neighbour’s court with it, give his Madonna to the goodwife, 
and get from her a useful present, an old leather wallet, 
crammed with food. 

To this he added the two clean shirts he owned, and a 
couple of his smallest drawings, rolled over a piece of broom¬ 
stick. The rest of the flimsy he left behind. 

There were many women in the city, of whom he might 
have taken his leave: even last night he had slept with one 
of them, without saying a word to her of his plans. It was 
not worth the trouble of taking seriously, so he said farewell 
to none but his landlord, and of him took his leave over¬ 
night, in order to set out early next day. 

184 


Yet in spite of this, another was up before him, to bid him 
into the kitchen for a milk-broth, just as he was about to 
creep from the house. It was a child of fifteen, the landlord’s 
daughter, a quiet, sickly maid, with beautiful eyes, but 
lamed in her hip-joint, so that she limped. Her name was 
Marie. With her face pale for want of sleep, but her hair 
carefully dressed and combed, to meet him, she set out 
warm milk for him in the kitchen, and bread to go with it, 
and seemed very sad to have him leave her. He thanked her 
with a farewell kiss, and pitied her. She took his kiss with 
half-closed eyes. 


i 


I 


i 


;■ 

( 

1 

I 

I . 
1 , 





CHAPTER THIRTEEN 



On the first days of these new wanderings, the first greedy 
tumult of new-won freedom, Goldmund had to learn all 
over again how to live the homeless, timeless life of the 
roads. The homeless live the lives of valiant children, 
obeying none, their only lord the changing sky, with no aim 
before them, and no roof over them, owning nothing, ready 
for any hazard - their beggarly and stalwart lives. They are 
Adam’s sons, who was turned forth, and brothers of the 
innocent beasts. From the hand of God, from hour to hour, 
they take whatever He may send them, sun, rain, mist, 
snow, heat or cold, famine or bellyful, and never notice how 
time goes, or consider the future, or man’s history. For 
them there is no striving to be great; they have no know¬ 
ledge of that strange idol called well-being to which the 
owners cling so fervently. A vagrant may be savage or 
gende, skilled in his life or slow to cope with it, valiant or 
cowardly, he is a child. He lives for ever in the Garden be¬ 
fore the coming of wars and cities, his steps guided on for 
ever by a few simple needs and longings. Cunning or slow 
of mind; feeling in the depth of his heart how brittle and 
fugitive is all life, how meagrely and fearfully living things 
carry their spark of warmth through the icy universe; or else 
a poor gluttonous simpleton going in the wake of his gnaw¬ 
ing belly - either of these is the deep implacable enemy and 
deadly rival of safe citizens. They dread him as they dread 
to be reminded of the running away of all that is, the eternal 
withering out of warmth and joy into chill inescapable 
death, which lives in the air and eats up all men. 

Summer and autumn died. Goldmund fought his way 

i86 


I, 

i. 

! 

ti 

i? 

i: 

i; 


through snow again, wandered, full of joy in the sweet¬ 
smelling spring, saw seasons tread each other down, the 
swift sinking to earth of golden summer. So he went on year 
by year, till at last it seemed he had forgotten all earthly 
things save thirst, hunger and love, and the quiet, uncanny 
slipping away of the years. He seemed to have sunk back 
utterly into the mother, lost in her world of hunger and 
appeasement, although in every dream or brooding rest, 
with a view out over flowering or withering valleys, his eyes 
were open and he a craftsman again, longing to shape this 
clear and hurrying life, exorcise and inform it with his 
spirit. 

Since Victor’s death he had always wandered alone. Yet 
now one day he found he had a companion, who seemed 
by degrees to have attached himself, without his ever having 
noticed it, and for some long time he could not get rid of 
him. But this new vagrant was no Victor; he was a Roman 
pilgrim and still young, who bore his pilgrim’s gown and 
wide hat, whose name was Robert, and his home by the 
Lake of Constance. This pilgrim, an artisan’s son, had been 
for a time to school with the monks of St Gallus, and 
already as a little boy, had his head crammed full of dreams 
of a Roman pilgrimage, till at last he had no other thought, 
and seized his first chance to make it reality. His father’s 
death, in whose shop he had had to work as a joiner, had 
brought him the liberty he craved. Scarcely was the old man 
safely buried than Robert announced to mother and sister 
that nothing now should hold him back, but he would go to 
Rome for his soul’s sake, to pray there for his father’s 
many sins and do penance for them. In vain the women 
wept and scolded, he set out for Rome, as obstinate as ever, 
without any bles.sing from his mother, amid a hail of 
shrewish chidings from his sister. It was more his longing 
to wander than any piety in him, though along with this 
went a kind of shallow devotion, a love of idling in the 



i! 





neighbourhood of priestly shows and cathedrals. His plea¬ 
sure was to listen to long offices, watch baptisms, burials, 
masses for the dead, sniff up incense, warm himself at the 
gleam of candles. He had managed to pick up a little Latin, 
though not enough to make himself a scholar, but to still the 
childish fancies of his soul in long, pious, hovering day¬ 
dreams at side-altars, in the shadow of naves. Goldmund did 
not mark him very closely, although he liked him well 
enough, and felt in some small measure akin to him in his 
urge to wander and see new lands. So that Robert had 
broken loose and even managed to get as far as Rome, 
lodged in his time in numerous cloisters and priests’ houses, 
seen the mountains, and the southern land beyond, and felt 
very happy indeed among Roman churches and the pious 
foundations of the city. There he had heard a hundred 
masses, knelt and dreamed at all the most famous holy 
shrines, received the sacraments, and breathed more incense 
than he needed to fumigate every sin of his youth, or indeed 
those of his father’s whole life. 

. He had been away a year or longer, but when at last he 
came back to his father’s house they did not welcome him as 
a prodigal, since he found that his sister in his absence had 
, made herself mistress of the household, with all the rights 
and duties that should have been his. She had married an 
industrious journeyman-carpenter, and ruled with such a 
rod of iron that Robert, after a short stay among them, 
knew himself one too many in his home, and nobody 
pressed him to remain when he talked of fresh journeys and 
pilgrimage. This did not trouble him overmuch. He begged 
a few spare groats from his mother, donned his pilgrim’s 
hat and gown afresh, and set out on another holy journey. 
This time he had no aim, but wandered here and there 
across the Empire, half-friar, half-vagrant, with copper 
medals jingling round his neck, from every famous place 
of pilgrimage, and indulgenced rosaries along with them. 
i88 


In such guise as this he met Goldmund, trudged at his side 
for a day, and exchanged many vagabonds’ tales with him, 
vanished in the next little market-town, fell in with him 
again here and there, and in the end, remained with him 
for good, as a willing, dependable companion. Goldmund 
pleased him very well, he admired his daring, wit, and know¬ 
ledge, loving him for his health, strength, and sincerity. 
He strove to win his favour with small services; they became 
good friends, since Goldmund was a very easy companion. 
One thing only he would not tolerate. When his brooding, 
thinking fit was on him, he would trudge along in stubborn 
silence, looking past Robert as though he were invisible; 
and then there must be no questions and no chattering, no 
gossiping attempts to comfort, he must be left alone within 
his mood, This Robert discovered for himself. Ever since 
he had known that Goldmund knew strings of Latin verses 
and songs; since one day, at the door of a cathedral, he had 
heard him explain the structure of the stone images, and 
watched him once, as they stood and rested by a wall, daub 
life-size figures in a few quick strokes on it in raddle, he 
had begun to consider his comrade one of God’s chosen, and 
indeed almost a magician. That women also favoured Gold¬ 
mund, so much that, with a look or smile he could make 
them grant him his desire, pleased Robert less, and yet he 
had to admire it. 

Their journey together was interrupted in a way which 
neither had foreseen. One day they came to the outskirts 
of a village: with cudgels, flails, and poles in their hands 
a handful of peasants awaited them, and, from far off, their 
leader shouted at them to get back, be gone to die devh, and 
never show their faces there again. Goldmund went on un¬ 
heeding, curious to see what the matter was, and soon a 
stone came crashing into his chest. Robert, for whom he 
looked about him, had scurried away, as though from fiends. 
The peasants edged nearer, shouting threats, so that nothing 

189 


was left him but to follow, though not so hastily. Robert 
awaited him, trembling, under a rood, with the hanging 
image of Christ, planted in the middle of a field. 

‘You ran like a hero,’ laughed Goldmund. ‘But what 
have those clods got into their thick heads? Is there a war? 
- are armed watchmen set before their hovels, and none per¬ 
mitted along the road? I marvel what lies behind all this.’ 

Neither could tell. Not until the following morning when 
certain adventures awaited them in the yard of an isolated 
farm, did the secret, piece by piece, reveal itself. The farm, 
set in the midst of a green orchard, with high grass and 
many fruit-trees, and composed of hut, stall, and barn, lay 
oddly quiet, as if asleep. In the orchard stood a cow, and 
lowed in the grass: it was easy enough to see it was time to 
milk her. They went to the house-door, knocked, and, get¬ 
ting no answer, to the cow-stall, which stood there gaping 
and empty, and so to the barn, on whose thatched roof the 
light green moss glistened in the early morning sunshine, 
There, too, they could find no living soul. 

They turned back to the house, baffled and glum at the 
emptiness of this homestead, beat again on the house-door 
with both fists, and still no answer came from within. Gold¬ 
mund pressed against it to open, found, to his surprise, the 
door unlocked, thrust it back, and entered the low, dark 
room. 

‘God greet you,’ he called aloud, ‘is no one at home ? ’ 

But there was silence. 

Robert lingered on outside. Goldmund went in, eager to 
see. It smelt very bad within the hut, a curious sickening 
stench. The hearth was piled with ashes, and he blew 
in them, since a few embers clung to the grey logs. Then, in 
the twilight of the chimney-corner, he looked up and 
noticed a seated shape. On a settle somebody sat asleep, and, 
through the gloom, he saw an old woman. To call was use¬ 
less, since the house lay as if bewitched, so he nudged the 
190 


sitter gently and laid his hand upon her shoulder. She did 
not stir even now, and he noticed that she sat in the midst of 
a spider’s web, its threads spun partly from her hair and 
partly clinging to her knees. He shivered a litde and thought 
‘She’s dead.’ To make quite certain of this he worked hard 
to build up a blaze, raking and puffing until he had a flame 
and could set a light to a long stick from it. This torch he 
held above the sitter’s face. Under white hair he saw the 
grey-blue features of a corpse, one eye still open, glazed as if 
with lead. She had died there sitting in her chimney-corner. 
Well, there was nothing to be done for her. 

Goldmund, with his flaring torch, stumbled here and 
there about the place. In the doorway to the room beyond 
he found another corpse stretched out. A boy of perhaps 
nine or ten, puckered and bloated, dead in his shift. He lay 
on his belly across the threshold, his two hands clenched 
into angry fists. ‘This is the second,’ Goldmund thought, 
and went on, as through an ugly dream, into a back room, 
where the shutters were pulled wide, so that the sunny day 
shone bright on everything. Carefully he extinguished his 
light, treading out the sparks on the floor. 

This back room had three beds; one empty, with ends of 
straw jutting out under the coarse grey linen sheet. On the 
second another body; a bearded man stiff on his back, his 
head thrust up, his chin and beard stuck out. This must be 
■ idle master of the house. His sunken face glistened dully, 
with the opalescent hues of death on it, one of his arms hung 
down to the earthen floor, where an empty pitcher lay on its 
side, with the long damp trickle not sucked up yet, and 
some of it run into a litde hollow in which a puddle was 
still standing. In the second bed, buried and muffled in 
sheets and coverlet, a broad strong woman lay hunched 
up, her face pressed down into the bedding, her coarse 
straw-blond hair glittering in the strong sunlight. Beside her, 
as though sucked down along with her, caught and stifled in 



tumbled linen swathes, lay a half-grown maid, straw-blonde, 
with grey-blue splotches on her dead face. 

Goidmund examined all these faces. In the little maid’s, 
though already it was puffed and swollen, there was a look 
of helpless shrinking away from death. This motlier’s nape 
and hair, who had burrowed so deeply and wildly, had a 
kind of rage and terror, of passionate flight, in them. This 
tousled hair would not be reconciled with death. The man’s 
face was defiant, and set in pain: he .seemed to have perished 
there by inches; his beard was thrust sharp into the air; 
a warrior, stretched upon the field. His rigid defi.ant sullen- 
ness was beautiful. It could have been no ordinary weakling 
who met his death there. Most moving of all was tlie corp.se 
of the little boy, lying on his belly over the threshold. His 
face said nothing, biii; his lioy’s fists, tightly clenched, told 
much, and the place where he lay over the threshold - a rest¬ 
less grief, a hopeless shielding of himself against unimagin¬ 
able pain. Close to his head a cat’s hole had been let into the 
lintel. 

Goidmund examined every detail. No doubt tins hut was 
very terrible, filled with the .savage stendi of death. Yet, in 
spite of all, its attraction was powerful enough. It was re:il 
and true, so full of magnificence and fate that something in 
its terror won his love, forcing a way into his soul. 

In the meantime Robert outside was calling tiuerulously. 
Goidmund wa.s fond enough of Robert, yet this voice 
brought a thought into his mind: how mean :ind foolisli are 
the living, with their never-ending terrors and curiosities, the 
puny effort of their lives, when faced with the ciniet, kingly 
dead. He would not answer at once but gave himself up 
to the spectacle of these bodies, with that strange admixture 
of deep pity and cold oh.servation that artists ii,se, raking a 
close look at their stiffened shapes: then back to the sitter in 
the chimney-corner to .scrutinize her head, lier eyes, her 
hands, the posture in which she had frozen up. How still 
192 


was this enchanted hut. How strange and terrible this death 
stench. How remote and ghostly this small habitation of 
living men, possessed by these - though a few pale sparks 
still clung to the logs - how penetrated and soaked in quiet 
decay! Soon this flesh would drop off the rigid faces, rats 
would .scurry out and gnaw the fingers. What others did in 
the decency of coffins, laid up in wood, safe in the earth, 
covered away for the last, most wretched of all processes, 
these five must accomplish above ground, dropping away 
and rotting in their dwelling-place by garish light, with 
clapping doors around them, untroubled, shameless, un¬ 
protected. 

Goidmund had seen many dead, yet never in his life met 
such an image of the unwithstood, eternal work of death. 
He let it all sink into his mind. 

Robert at last broke up the.se thoughts with his cries. He 
went outside, his comrade questioned him fearfully. 

‘What is it?’ he asked in a low voice. ‘Ls any one there? 
Oh, what a face you have - well, say something,’ 

Goidmund eyed him coldly. 

‘Go in and see for yourself. It’s a queer-looking house in 
there. Then we can milk the peasant’s pretty cow. In with 
you.’ 

Robert obeyed uncertainly, groped his way through the 
twilight to the chimney-corner, found the old woman be¬ 
side her hearth, saw she was dead, and let out a yell fit to 
wake her. He ran hack with staring eyes. 

‘For God’s sake, Goidmund! There’s a dead old woman 
sitting by the hearth-stone. What is it? Why is nobody with 
her? Why can’t they bury her? Oh, God, what a stink 
there is I’ 

Goidmund smiled. 

‘You’re a hero, Robertl But what made you come out 
again so fast. A dead old woman sitting in her chair is a 
sight worth noting, for any man. And if you go a few steps 

193 




further you’ll see something better still beyond. There are 
five of them in there, Robert. Three in their beds, and a ; 
dead boy in the doorway, besides old granny. The whole 
family lies there stinking, and the house itself is well-nigh 
starting to rot. So this was why we found an unmilked 
cow.’ 

There was only fear in Robert’.s eyes, suddenly he cried in 
a shrill voice: 

‘Oh -1 see now what those peasants were after yesterday 
when they came to chase us from their village. God! - now 
I see it all -* it’s the plague 1 By ray poor wretched soul, the 
plague! Goldmund! And you’ve been in tluat all this while, 
fingering corpses like as not. Get away from me. Don’t 
come so near. You’re poisoned for sure! I’m sorry, Gold¬ 
mund, but I must leave you. I can’t go along with you now.’ 

Before he could manage to run a yard Goldmund had 
hold of his pilgrim’s gown, and held him, wriggle as he 
might. 

‘Young sir,’ he said, mocking him gently, ‘you’re a 
cleverer fellow than I took you for, and most likely what 
you say is the truth of it. Well, we shall find that out in 
time, in the next farm or village. It’s likely there’s the 
plague in these parts, we shall know if wc escape it and 
come off again. But to let you run like that, young Robert - 
oh, no! I’m a soft-hearted mian. I couldn’t bear to think of 
you stricken with the fever, as most likely you are, having j 
been in that room with it, and scuttling off by yoiir.sclf, to 
lie down somewhere in the fields, and die alone, with no 
man near you to close your eyes, and none to make you a 
grave or throw the earth on you - oh, tu), my friend, that 
thought’s too sad I So mark me, and mark me well, fm what ; 
I say I won’t ,say twice: we two run the same risk, it may 
bite either you or me. So we’ll stay together and perish to ; 
gather, or else come through this cunsed pesf-l:mcl. Should 
you sicken and die I am here to bury yon, and I promise it. 

194 , 


If I die, do as you will, bury me or run off and leave me, 
all’s one. But till that time, dear Robert, you don’t escape 
me. Remember that! We shall need each other. Now hold 
your noise, I want to hear nothing! And off to that stall to 
find a milk-pail, so then we can milk the cow at last.’ 

So it was done, and from that instant it was Goldmund 
who commanded, Robert obeyed, and for both this made 
things go easier. Robert did not try to escape again. He 
answered in a soft meek voice: 

‘You scared me for a minute, Goldmund. You looked so 
queer, as you came out of that room with all those corpses, 
and I thought you must be smitten with the plague. Even if 
you’re not, your face is different 1 Was it so bad - what you 
saw in there?’ 

‘No, not so bad,’ Goldmund hesitated, ‘I saw nothing in 
there but what lies in store for you and me, and every other 
man and woman on earth, even with no plague to bite 
us.’ 

They went further and soon, on every side, had black 
death round them, that ruled the land. Many villages re¬ 
fused all access, in others they could wander in every street. 
Farms stood empty, many rotting dead lay out in the fields, 
or dropped to pieces in their rooms. Cows, unmilked or 
famished, lowed in the stalls, and cattle ran wild over the 
country. They milked and foddered many goats, slaugh¬ 
tered and roasted at the wood’s-edge many a kid and many a 
sucking pig, drank the wine and cider in many cellars with¬ 
out any hindrance from the master. They had a good life, 
yet could only half-taste of all these riches. Robert was in 
perpetual fear of the plague, his belly heaved to see a 
corpse; often he was almost mad for fright, again and again 
declared himself struck down, stood long with his head and 
hands in the smoke of camp fires (it passed for wholesome) 
and, even asleep, would feel himself all over to make certain 
that arms and legs and armpits had no boils. Goldmund 
195 


sometimes chid, and often mocked-him. He did not share 
Robert’s terrors, his sick mistrust of a corpse. With sad 
abstraction filling all his mind he plodded through this land 
of death, fearfully drawn by the sight of the great slaughter, 
his soul full of a vast autumn, his heart attuned with the 
song of the mowing scythe. Often, he could see hivS mother 
again, a giantess with the livid face of Medusa, smiling her 
heavy smile of death and'grief. 

One day they came to a little town. The place was heavily 
fortified. From its gates, on a level with the housetops, wide 
ramparts spanned the town’s whole girth; and yet no watch¬ 
man stood above, and none under the open arch of the gate¬ 
way. Robert feared to enter this walled town, and begged 
the other not to venture. Meanwhile came the sound of a 
death-bell, a priest with a crucifix held aloft, and behind 
him three loaded wagons, two pulled by horses, one by 
oxen, each piled high with its dead. A couple of churls in 
strange cloaks, their faces buried in pointed cowls, ran at 
the side, to prick the beasts. 

Robert’s knees were shaking under him, his face was the 
colour of whey. Goldmund followed after the death-carts, 
keeping a little distance in their wake. But not to a grave¬ 
yard Out on the empty heath gaped a hole, only deep a 
couple of hands, yet wide as the throne-room in a palace. 
Goldmund stood and watched the churls tear down the 
dead from their carts with long hooked poles, and heap 
them into the earth, as the priest muttered and waved hi,s 
crucifix, went off again, and left them there, to build great 
fires around the graves, and run back in silence into their 
city. He went to the edge and looked down. Fifty or more 
must be huddled there, one over the other, many naked. 
Flere and there a stiff reproachful arm or leg, the edge of a 
shift fluttering in the wind. 

When he came back Robert went on his knees to him, 
begging hirn to hurry away from the place. He had good 
196 


reason for such petition, since the absent look in Gold- 
mund’s eyes, diat deep stare, grown all too familiar, re¬ 
vealed to him only his fellow’s longing to see more and 
more of death. He could not prevail over Goldmund, yet 
would not follow, and let him go alone through the gates. 

As he passed under this unwatched gateway, and heard 
his feet ring out again on cobbles, Goldmund remembered 
many little towns into which he had loitered off the high¬ 
road. How noisy they had been, with children’s voices, with 
boys shouting at their games, women squabbling, smiths 
hammering music out of anvils and many such delicate, 
lusty sounds to welcome him, whose intermingled skein 
had filled his ears with all tlie manifold pattern of human 
work, pleasure, accomplishment, companionship. Here, in 
this hollow-sounding gateway, these empty streets, there 
was no noise; it all lay dead and rigid with decay, and the 
music of a gossiping brook came far too loudly, almost dis¬ 
turbingly. Behind one grating he saw a baker, in the midst 
of his quartern loaves and small-bread. Goldmund pointed 
to a loaf, and the baker thrust it forth very gingerly, laid 
on the end of a long baking shovel, and waited for 
Goldmund’s money to be set down. With nothing more 
than an evil look, as the stranger set no money on the shovel, 
but went on his way munching the loaf, the baker pulled his 
grating to again. 

Along the casement ledge of a fine house stood a row of 
earthen vases, where flowers had bloomed, and over which 
hung shrivelled leaves. From another came sobs and the 
whining cries of a child. But in the next street, high up in 
her window, Goldmund saw a dainty girl, combing her 
hair out of a casement. He caught her eye, and she blushed, 
but did not turn aside from him, and when he smiled, a 
poor weak smile crept into her face along with her blushes. 

‘Soon have finished your combing?’ he called up to her. 

She bent down smiling over her window-ledge. 

197 


N.&.-10 



‘Not sick yet?’ he asked, and she shook her head. ‘Well, 
come with me, then, leave this death-warren! Let’s go into 
the woods and have a good life there.’ 

Her eyes began to question his. 

‘I mean it!’ Goldmund insisted, ‘but don’t take too long 
to think it over. Have you father and mother, or do you live 
here with strangers as their serving-wench? Strangers, eh? 
Then come, sweet, let the old folks finish their dying! 
We’re sound and young, and want a good life while we can 
get it. Come, litde brown-hair -• this is my earnest.’ 

She took his measure, hesitant and surprised. He loitered 
on down an empty street, then down a second, and came 
back slowly. There stood the maid, bent over her window- 
ledge, and rejoiced to think he had not left her. She 
beckoned him, he went on past her; soon she had come 
running to his side and, even before the gate, she had 
caught up with him, a little bundle in her hand, her brown 
hair bound in a red kerchief. 

‘What do they call you?’he asked. 

‘Lene. I’ll come along with you. Oh, it’s so bad here in 
the town - all dying* Let’s get away, far away I ’ 

Not far from the gates Robert squatted ill-humouredly 
on the ground. He sprang up at the sight of Goldmund, 
and stared when he saw a maid beside him. This time it was 
not easy to calm his fears, he wailed, lamented, and pro¬ 
tested. To bring a woman out of that den of sickness, and 
force poor Robert to keep company with her - it was worse 
than mad, it was tempting God, he would not go another 
step beside them; he must leave them now, his patience was 
at an end. 

Goldmund let him curse and rail himself out. 

‘There,’ he said, ‘you’ve sung your song. Now, you’ll 
come along with us, and be thankful you have such a dainty 
companion. And listen, Robert, I have good news for you. 
We’ll live awhile now in peace and health, and do all we 
198 


can to shun this pestilence. We’ll find some place in the 
woods, with an empty hut in it, or build one; and there I 
shall live with Lene as man and wife, and you, my friend, 
shall keep house along with us. Let’s have a little case and 
quiet together. Are you willing? ’ 

Oh, yes, Robert agreed with all his heart. If only he were 
not expected to give Lene his hand or touch her gown. 

‘No,’ said Goldmund, ‘that you need not. Indeed, I for¬ 
bid you very strictly to put so much as a finger on Lene. So 
be content.’ 

All three went on together, at first in silence, till at last 
Lene began to talk. How glad she was to see meadows 
again, and trees, and the wide sky; it had been so terrible in 
the plague-town, she could never say how fearful it had been. 
But then she began to tell them all, easing her mind of all its 
dread. She had many stories of horrid sights, evil tales, for 
the little town had been a hell. One of the two leeches had 
died, the other would only visit the rich; dead lay and stank 
in many houses, with no man to take them out and bury 
them; in others the coffin-bearers had stolen, swilled and 
whored, and often, along with the corpses, they had pulled 
the living sick out of their beds, and thrown them with the 
others into their death-carts. She had many such fearful 
things to relate. Neither interrupted her words. Robert 
heard it all with shuddering joy, Goldmund silent and in¬ 
different, letting her pour out all her grief. He made no 
comment. What was a man to say to all that? At last Lene 
was tired, her torrent of words had spent itself. Goldmund 
slackened his pace and, in a low voice, struck up a song - 
a song with many verses and ritournelles, and with every 
verse his voice grew louder. Lene had begun to smile, and 
Robert listened, happy and amazed. Never before had he 
heard Goldmund sing. Why, he could do anything, this 
Goldmund! He was a sorcerer. Goldmund sang truly and 
well, though his voice was muted. And already, with the 
199 




second verse, Lene had begun to join in, and soon she was 
with him full-throatedly. The sun was setting; away along 
the sky-line, over the heath, lay black woods, with far blue 
mountains behind them, bluer and bluer, as though their | 
hue came from within. Merry or sad, to the beat ol; their 
tread, went Goldmund’s song. ; 

‘You seem very happy today,’ said Robert. ., 

‘Of course, I am happy today when I have such a fine . 

love to go with me! Oh, Lene, how glad I am that the death i 

churls left you over for me! Tomorrow we’ll find a little 
hut, and in it we can live a good life and be glad that our 
flesh and bones still fit so well together. Lene, have you j 
.seen, in the woods in autumn, the little brown mushroom.s 

the snails love so-and which you can eatf’ : 

‘Oh, yes,’ she smiled, ‘I’ve seen them often.’ ■ 

‘They are just as brown as your hair, and it smells every 
bit as good as they do. Shall we sing another catch, or arc 
you hungry? I’ve still something good in my wallet.’ 

Next day they found what they were after. In a birch- 
wood stood a hut, of rough pine-logs, built by woodcutters 
or hunters. It was empty, the door could be prised o[ien, | 
and Robert thought it a good hut, and felt the place to Itc 
healthy. On their way they had met .some goats, straying ; 
along the road without their .shepherd, and had a fine 
nannygoat along with them. 

‘Robert,’ said Goldmiind, ‘you may not be a master car¬ 
penter, but at least you were a joiner in your youth. We • 
want to live and keep our .state here, and you must build the 
dividing wall of our castle, so that then we shall have two 
good rooms, one for my Lene and me, the other for you and | 

your nannygoat, We haven’t much to cat though, so today 
we shall have to do with goat’s milk whether there’s much 
of it or little. Now you must build us a wall, while we two 
krew the beds for all three of us. And tomorrow I’ll go out : v 
after victuals.’ 

200 


They got to work at once. Lene and Goldmund gathered 
ferns and moss and dry leaves, Robert whetted his knife on 
a flint to cut branches and build up a wall. But he could 
not finish it that day, so for the night he went off and slept 
in the wood. 

Goldmund found a sweet mistress in Lene, shy and 
young and full of love. He took her gently in his arms, and 
they lay awake many hours, he listening to the beating of 
her heart when she, long appeased and weary, had fallen 
asleep. He smelt her brown hair and nestled against it, 

^ tliinking all the while of that wide shallow grave into which 
mumming devils had emptied out their cartloads of dead. 
Our life is fair, fair and soon over all our happiness, fair and 
quickly withered our youth. 

The wall when it was built was a good one, but before 
that they had all three worked on it. Though Robert itched 
to show his skill, he bragged for hours of what he might 
have managed, if only he had had his tools, his planing 
bench, his iron rule and nails. Since here he had only his 
two hands and a knife, he contented himself with cutting a 
dozen birch stems, and setting them in a firm close row, well 
planted in the soil of the floor. The spaces in between, so he 
insisted, would have to be filled with plaited birch twigs. 
That needed time, but the work went happily, andboth the 
others lent him a hand. Meanwhile Lene went picking ber¬ 
ries, and saw to foddering the goat, while Goldmund 
strayed about the wood spying, out die lie of the land for 
food, and bringing his plunder back home with him. Far 
and wide there were no men, and this pleased Robert very 
well, since now there was no danger of being tainted, or 
having an enemy to fight. Its disadvantage lay in this, that 
diey found very little to stay their hunger. There was an 
empty peasant’s holding not far off, and this time one with¬ 
out any dead in it, so that Goldmund urged that they must 
move there, instead of keeping to their log hut. But Robert 
201 


1 




shuddered and made such faces tdiat Goldmund went alone 
to the empty house, and brought back all the gear along 
with him, though every piece he fetched must be washed 
and smoked at the fire before Robert would touch it. 

Certainly it was not much he found there; two stout 
posts, a hatchet and,a milkpail, a few iron vessels and, one 
day, he caught two hens escaped in a field. Lene was beloved 
and happy, and all three laughed, as tliey made their litde 
home, adding something better every day. Bread they might 
lack, but found instead another goat, and near them a bit of 
ploughland with beetroots. Day after day sped by, the wattle 
wall was standing finished, their beds were softer than be¬ 
fore, and a chimney with a hearth-stone built in the hut. 
Not far off was a stream where the water was clear and 
sweet. They would often sing over their work. 

Once, as they drank their milk together, and applauded 
their householder’s life, Lene, in a dreamy voice, said sud¬ 
denly: 

‘But how will it be in the winter?’ 

No one could answer her. Robert laughed. Goldmund 
stared uneasily in front of him. Suddenly Lene grew aware 
that neither had so much as thought of that. Neither in his 
heart intended to stay long in this place, and so their home 
was not a home, and she only a wanderer with vagabonds. 
She hung her head. 

Then Goldmund answered, as one jokes to put new heart 
into a child; 

‘You’re a real peasant’s daughter, Lene, and such have a 
care for far-off days. Don’t be afraid! You can soon find 
your way back home again, when the plague-time is over 
and forgotten. Then you can go to your own, or whoever 
else may be there waiting for you, or back into the town as a 
serving-wench, and get your bread. But now it’s summer 
still, and here it’s pleasant, and life is good. So let’s stay 
here together as short or long a while as pleases us.’ 


‘And after?’ cried Lene angrily. ‘It will soon be winter. 
Then you’ll jog off alone. And I -? ’ 

Goldmund snatched her plaits and tugged them gently. 

‘You silly maid,’ he said, ‘do you forget the grave-churls 
and the death-carts, and the houses standing empty or full 
of corpses, or that hole by the gates, with the fires burning? 
Be glad you’re not lying out in a hole, with the rain pattering 
down onto your shift. That’s what you should think. “I’ve 
come out of it, and still have sweet life in my limbs, and can 
sing and laugh still.” ’ 

That did not please her yet. 

‘But I don’t want to be off again,’ she whimpered. ‘You 
shan’t leave me - no! How can I live happily here, if I 
know that soon it will all be past and over?’ 

Once more Goldmund answered her gently, but this 
time with a hint of threat in his voice. 

‘My Lene, what you have just been saying has plagued 
every wise man in the world, and all of them have broken 
their skulls, thinking of it. But if what we have now is not 
to your liking, or good enough for such as you, I’ll fire the 
hut this very minute, and let us all go our ways. Be content, 
Lene, I speak my mind.’ 

She said no more, but a shadow lay across their love. • 


202 





CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


Before the summer was quite withered their life in the huts 
came to an end, unexpectedly. One day Goldmimd cut a 
sling, and strayed here and there around the clearing with it, 
in the hope of winging a partridge, or some such game, 
since their store of food was getting scanty. Lenc had come 
with him to pick berries. Sometimes he would cross her 
track, and could see her head between the branches, on its 
brown neck, rising from the linen shift, and hear her .sing¬ 
ing. Once she came to his side, and they munched some ber¬ 
ries: then she went on, and he lost sight of her. He thought 
of her half-tenderly, half-angrily. She had spoken again of 
autumn, and the future, and then said she believed herself 
with child, and would never let him go from her again. 

'Now I must end it,’ he was thinking. ‘Soon I shall be 
weary of all this, and then I must wander again alone, and 
leave Robert, too, and see that before the winter comes I get 
back to the Bishop’s city, to Master Nicholas, and there I 
shall weather out this winter, and next spring buy rny.sclf 
some good shoes, and trudge on till I reach our cloister in 
Mariabronn, and greet Narziss. It must be full ten years 
since I saw him. I must see him again, if only for a clay, or 
two days.’ 

A sudden voice broke in upon his thoughts, and he grew 
instantly aware how far his mind and wishes had .strayed 
from Lene, as though he had gone from her already. Fie 
listened sharply ; the same noise startled him again, and he 
thought he could hear Lene’s voice, calling in the bitterest 
need. Soon he was near enough. Yes, it was Lene. He hur- 
204 


ried on, still rather angry, though her cries had roused his 
dread and pity. When at last he came within sight she was 
kneeling, or crouching, in the grass, her gown half-torn off 
her body, screaming and struggling with a man. Goldraund 
rushed in on them, all the grief, anger, uneasiness in his 
mind venting itself in rage against the aggressor. He came 
upon him, just as he had pinned her to earth; her naked 
breasts streamed blood, and the man held and clasped her 
greedily. Goldmund threw himself onto him, and crushed 
his throat with lustful, angry hands, a thin, reedy throat, 
covered in hair. He throttled with delight, till the man hung 
limp. Still gripping hard, he dragged his swooning, sur¬ 
rendered enemy over the ground, to a place where grey 
ridges of stone jutted, sharp and bare, out of the earth. Here 
he raised him high, twice, thrice, and, heavy as he was, 
dashed down his head. 

He flung the body away with its neck broken, his anger 
still imappeased; he would have liked to do him a longer 
injury. 

Lene watched it all with delight. Her breasts streamed 
blood, she was trembling still from head to foot, gasping 
for air. But now she had stumbled to her knees, and, in 
ecstasy, watched her mighty lover drag her assailant over the 
ground, throttle him, break his neck, and fling him aside. 
He lay like a slaughtered snake, limp and disjointed; his 
grey face, with the wild beard and matted hair, hung piti¬ 
fully down over his chest. Lene stumbled, with cries of 
triumph, to her feet; yet suddenly, now, her face went 
white, the fear still shook in all her limbs, she turned sick, 
and fell fainting into the bilberry shrubs. Soon she was re¬ 
covered enough to let Goldraund lead her back to the hut, 
where he washed the blood from her breasts, all covered in 
scratches, and one with the marks of a man’s teeth on it. 
Robert was entranced by this adventure, and eager for de¬ 
tails of the fight. 


205 






‘His neck broken, you say? Wonderful, Goidmund; all 
men fear you.’ : 

Goidmund had no wish to speak further of it. His rage 
had cooled, and soon, as they left the huddled corpse, he had j: 
had to think of Victor, the poor, dead guzzler, and that here : 
was the second man to die at his hands, fo get clear of ; 
Robert, he answered: 1 

‘Well now, you can do something yourself. Go along, 
and see that he gets a burial. If you find it too hard to scrape 
up a hole for him, drag him as far as the pool, and throw f 
him in among the reeds; or cover him well with earth and 
stones.’ 

Robert would hear nothing of this. Pie would have no i 
truck with corpses. Plow could you ever be certain that a 
corpse had no taint of plague on him ? 

Lene had lain down in the hut. The bite on her breast 
throbbed and burned. Yet, in spite of it, she soon felt better, ; 

rose, blew up her fire, and warmed the gf)at’s milk for their i 

supper. She was full of mirth, yet none the less they sent her ! 

early to bed, where she went like a lamb, so deep wa.s her 
admiration of Goidmund. 

He however was surly, and would say nothing. Robert, 
knowing his mood, left him in peace. When, late that night, : 
Goidmund joined Lene on the straw, he bent above her, 
listening to her breath. She slept; he lay very restless, tliink- j 
ing of Victor, longing to get up and go from the others, 
feeling that this was the end of playing at houses. i 

Yet one thing had .set him thinking. Pic had caught the - 
look in Lenc’s eyes, as she watched him fling aside the 
throttled churl. That had been a thing worth noting, and 
he knew he never should forget it. In those wide, horro^ i; 
stricken, delighted eyes, there had been such a glint of 
triumphant pride, such a glow of deep and passionate ; 

lechery, as he never had seen or imagined in women’s faces. ; 

But for this one look, he might not have remembered Lene’s 
206 


face, when he strove, years later, to recall it. It had been 
enough, this single look, to give her peasant’s face a terror 
and k'auty. For months his eyes had seen nothing which 
roused the thought, ‘This should be carved.’ With this, in 
a kind of livid terror, the wish to draw flashed back into his 
mind. 

Since he could not sleep he stood up at last, and went 
outside. It was cold, a breeze sighed in the birches. He 
walked up and down in the dark, came to rest on a stone, 
lost in his thoughts, deep in sadness. He suffered for Vic- 
tor’s sake, for the sake of the man he had slain today, suf¬ 
fered for the loss of his innocence, the clear, child’s beauty 
of his soul. Was it for this he had broken out of the cloister, 
left Narziss, given such pain to Master Nicholas, scorned 
even to marry the pretty Lisbeth - that he might live like a 
gipsy on a heath, chase escaped cattle through the woods, 
batter out .a wretched life on the stones. Had it all any sense 
or worth in it? He sank back, and stared up at the pale 
night-clouds, till lie had gazed so long that his thoughts all 
left him. He could not tell if he watched clouds or looked 
into the darkness of his own mind. Then, at the instant he 
fell a.slcep, there flamed, in the drifting sky, like a lightning 
flash, the great pale face of hi.s Eve, her heavy eyelids 
drooping above him. Suddenly these eyes opened wide; 
deep eyes, full of longing and lust to kill. Goidmund slept, 
till the dew had soaked him.' 

Next day Lene was sick. They let her lie; there was much 
to do. Eiiiiy that morning Robert had seen two sheep in the 
wood, which scampered away as he approached thepa. Pic 
ran back for Goidmund, they hunted the sheep half the diiy, 
and at last succeeded in trapping one of them. They were 
tired out when, towards evening, they reached their hut 
with the beast. 

Lene felt sick to death. Goidmund bent oyer her, feeling 
her body, and found plague-boils. This he kept to himself, 
207 


but Robert suspected it at once, when he heard that Lene 
was still sick, and so refused to come inside. He must find 
some place to sleep in the wood, he said, and must take the 
goat, since it too could sicken of the plague. 

‘Go to the devil,’ Goldmund shouted. ‘Never let me set 
eyes on you again.’ 

But he seized the goat, and led it into the hut, behind the 
birch wall. Quietly, without his goat, Robert went off, full 
of dread; dread of the plague, dread of Goldmund, dread 
of solitude and the night. He lay down to sleep, nearby, in 
the woods. 

Goldmund said to Lene: 

‘Don’t be afraid. I’m with you. You’ll soon be better.’ 

She shook her head. 

‘Be careful, love. Don’t come too near me. And don’t 
you weary yourself to comfort me. I must die, and I’d 
rather die now than see an empty place beside me, and know 
you’d gone from me for ever. Every morning I thought of 
that and feared it. No, I’d rather die.’ 

By morning it was already bad with her. From time to 
time Goldmund brought her a drink of water, and then, for 
an hour or two, he slept. Now as the light came creeping 
into the hut, he could see death plainly in her face, it looked 
so soft and shrivelled up. He went outside, to breathe the 
air and see the sky. The two gnarled fir trunks at the 
wood’s edge were already glittering in the sunrise; the 
morning tasted sweet and cool, the far-off hills were hidden 
in a mist. He went a few steps further, stretched his tired 
body, took a deep breath. The world was fair on this sad 
morning. Now he would soon be on the roads again, This 
was a time for leave-taking. 

Out of the wood Robert called to him. Was she any bet¬ 
ter? He would stay with them if only it weren’t the plague. 
Goldmund must not be angry, he had kept the sheep with 
him all night. 


‘Get away to hell, and your sheep along with you,’ 
shouted Goldmund. ‘Lene’s half-dead, and I’m infected.’ 
This last he invented to get rid of him. This Robert might 
be harmless enough, but Goldmund wanted no more of his 
company. He was far too timid and mean, did not sort with 
this hour of fate and horror. Robert went off and never 
came back. Lene lay asleep when he entered the hut. He 
too dozed off for a while, and in a dream saw Bless his pony, 
and the lovely chestnut in the cloister. In this dream he felt 
that he looked across an endless desert, at a lost home that 
was still dear to him. Tears ran down his cheeks, and over 
his yellow beard as he woke. 

He heard Lene speak, in a feeble voice. She had called 
him, and he sat upright on his straw. But she spoke to none, 
only muttered words to herself, little love-words and words 
of strife, laughing to herself and sighing heavily, till at last 
she sobbed, and gradually her voice died out. Goldmund 
stood up and bent over her tainted face, noting all its lines 
with bitter eagerness, traced out its forms, twisted and 
jumbled together, by the shrivelling breath of destruction. 
‘Sweet Lene,’ his heart called, ‘my sweet, kind, pretty one ■ 
- will you leave me, too? Are you, too, weary of me, al¬ 
ready?’ 

He would have liked to run off and leave her. To wander 
far, breathe in the air, tire himself out, see new sights, would 
ease his pain, might even perhaps have comforted his grief. 
Yet he could not leave the maid to die alone. 

Lene could drink no more goat’s milk, so he drank his 
fill, since now they had no other food. Several times he led 
out the goat to pasture, let it run, and get its drink of 
water. Then he went back to stand by Lene’s side, whisper¬ 
ing tenderness, gazing very closely into her face, watching 
her die, disconsolate but attentive. She was conscious still, at 
times asleep, but when she woke she could only half un¬ 
close her eyes, their lids were so heavy and sagging. From 
209 


208 






hour to hour this young girl aged and aged, wrinkles came 
round her eyes and nostrils; on her fresh young neck stood 
the quickly withering face of a grandmother. She said very 
little; only ‘Goldmund’ or ‘Oh, my love,’ striving to moisten 
her blue swollen lips with her tongue. Then he would set 
the pitcher to her mouth. 

In the night she died, without a plaint, in one short sigh, 
and then no more breath came from her body. A shudder 
ran along her skin. This sight caused his heart to swell with 
grief, as he thought of the dying fish in the market-place, 
whose death he had so often seen and pitied. That was just 
how they too had died: one spasm, then a quick, light 
shudder, running along their bodies from end to end, skim¬ 
ming off the sheen, and the life along with it. He knelt with 
her a little while longer, then ran out into the air, to lie in 
bracken. He remembered the goat, and went back for it. 
It strayed a while, and lay down on the grass. He lay beside 
it, pillowed his head on its flank, and slept till daybreak. 
Then he entered the hut for the last time, and there, on the 
hither side of the wattle, took one last look at Lene’s face. He 
loathed to abandon the dead; went forth again to gatlier an 
armful of bracken, dried leaves and boughs, and fling them 
into the hut; .struck fire, and set liglit to it all, From the hut 
itself he took nothing but flint and steel. Their wattle fence 
went up in flame in an instant. 

Outside he stood to watch it burn, iiis face, scorched by 
the blaze, till at last the roof stood in flames, and the first 
rafter crashed within. The goat leapt about him, bleating 
wildly. It would have been well to slaughter the little bea,st 
and roast himself a morsel of goat’s flesh, to get up his 
strength for the roads, but he could not do it. He drove the 
goat into the bushes. Smoke from Leric’s pyre followed 
him on his way through the woods. Never had he set forth 
so disconsolate. 

But that which now awaited his sight was wor.se, far 


wor.se, than he had imagined. It began with the first farms 
and villages, and never ceased, no matter how far he 
strayed, more terrible and strange as he found his way into 
it. A thick mist of decay hung over this land, a veil of 
cruelty, horror, darkness of soul. The worst were not the 
empty houses, the farmyard dogs, famished or rotting on 
their chains, the dead, strewn about the earth, the begging 
children, the death-holes at city gates. Far worse than any 
dead were the living, who seemed to have their souls 
crushed out of them by a load of horror and panic fear of the 
end. Strange, gruesome tales met him on all sides. Parents 
had run from their children, husbands from their ailing 
wives, the instant they knew them to be tainted.^ Death- 
churls, hospital servitors, ruled like hangmen, looting the 
perished houses and, if it pleased them, leaving the dead to 
fall to bits; plucking the dying from their beds and casting 
them, alive, into the death-carts. Crazy, mumbling fugi¬ 
tives wandered the roads, shunning every contact with other 
men, hunted on and on by the thought of death. Others, 
resolute to live, herded, while still they might, in merry 
bands, dancing and drabbing, with Death their fiddler. 
Lost waifs clustered at graveyard gates, or crept into empty, 
plundered houses. And, worst of all, each sought a scape¬ 
goat, to unload this horrible weight of grief; each had his 
tale of some cursed creature whose guilt had brought this 
on the land, whose malice had conjured up the pestilence. 
Devilish folk, they would say to Goldmund, of their hate 
had spread death here and there, squeezed poison from 
the boils of corpses, to daub it over walls and lintels, infect¬ 
ing well-springs, and the cattle. Any in such suspicion were 
lost, unless they had ken warned and could take flight, since 
justice and the mob soon made an end of them. The rich 
had brought the plague, said the poor, and the rich said it 
was the poor; while many said it was the Jews, and some 
the Italians, or the leeches. In one city, with fierce disgust 



in his heart, Goldmitnd watched the Jews roast in their 
Jewery, house taking fire from house, while the mob 
clamoured around and made a ring, to thrust back shiieking 
fugitives into the flames. Everywhere in this welter of hate : 
and grief, the innocent were burned, racked, or struck 
down. Goldmund felt that the world was poisoned in- ; 
deed, since there seemed no innocence or joy, honour or 
love, on earth any more. Then, since death’s fiddle sounded : 
in every place, he would join the merriest of the dancers: he 
had learnt to hear their notes far in the distance, could strum 
a lute to their caperings, or himself dance all night long 
under pitch-pine torches. 

He did not fear. Once on a winter’s night under the fir- 
trees, with Victor’s fingers round his throat, he had tasted 
the deep terror of death. He had known it since, out on the : 
moors, in the snow and dearth of many hard days wan¬ 
derings. But that had been such deatli as a man could ; 
grapple with; against it he could set himself on guard, and 
so he had fought death off with weary limbs, with shaking 
hands and gnawing belly. None could fight tins death by 
pestilence; they must let it rage, and surrender to it, and 
Goldmund had surrendered long ago. He did not fear, since 
it seemed to him there was nothing left in life for him, now 
he had turned from Lene’s shrivelling body and wandered 
so many days in the Kingdom of Bones. Yet a strange, 
sharp eagerness kept him alert. He could never tire of ■ 
watching the reaper at his work, or listening to the .song of 
passing life. Nothing could ap[)al his sight; in every [ilacc ; 
the same quiet passion seized him, to he by, noting with 
careful eyes each step along the road through hell. He 
would eat tainted bread in pcrisiied houses, sing and share 
their wine with tipfiters, pluck the quickly shrivelling ; 

flowers of lust, gaze into the staring eyes of women, the ■ 

glazed, unanswering eyes of sots, the,slowly filming eyes of 
the dying; loving these fevered, de.sperate, half-dead har¬ 


lots; help for a plate of broth to carry out corpses, shovel 
on the earth for two farthings. The world had grown savage 
and full of darkness, death howled his song in Goldmund’s 
straining cans, who marked its note with never-sated eager¬ 
ness. 

His aim was the city of Master Nicholas, urged thither 
by the longing to work again, though the way was long 
and full of fear, through a shrivelled world, where light 
had perished. He trudged sadly on, lulled by death- 
songs, but attentive to the wailing voices of men, sad, 
and yet aglow with desire, his itch to see it all never 
appeased. 

In a cloister he saw a freshly painted wall-picture, and had 
to .stand there long, before he could leave it. It was a dance 
of death across the wall: pale Bones dancing folk off the 
earth, a king, a bishop, an abbot, a count, a knight, a leech, a 
peasant) a serf, he took them all - and skeletons piped, 
through hollow bones, to lead them. Goldmund’s curious 
eyes took in this picture. There, from what he had seen of 
murky death, some unknown fellow-craftsman drew the 
lesson, crying his shrill-voiced admonition that all must die, 
in the ears of men. It was good, a very good sermon, was 
this wall-painting: the fellow had seen the matter well, his 
savage picture seemed to moan and rattle. Yet none the 
less Goldmund had felt it otherwise. Here it was the neces¬ 
sity to die that stood painted up so sternly and inescapably. 
Goldmund would have liked another picture. In him death’s 
wildest .song had a different echo, a voice calling homewards 
into the earth, home to a mother; its sounds not harsh and 
white, but sweet and enticing. Here, where death thrust 
forth his hand into life, it was as an iron-tongued warrior 
that he came. And yet his voice had other notes in k; deep, 
loving sounds, gentle as sated autumn, so that near him the 
tiny lamp of life seemed to shine with a brighter, warmer 
glow. For others death might be a captain, a judge, a hang- 
213 


212 





man, a stem father-for Goldmund death was also a mother 
and mistress, crooning the enticements of life, touching him 
with a shiver of desire. 

When he had left the painted death-dance, and gone his 
way, he longed still more for work, and Master Nicholas. 
Yet every place he traversed had something to hinder him, 
new sights of death, a fresh experience, and he sniffed their 
reek with eager nostrils. Face after face demanded an hour 
or day of this watcher’s pity or curiosity. For three days he 
had a little whimpering peasant-boy at his side, and for 
hours carried him on his back; a half-famished waif of five 
or six, from whom he found it hard to rid himself. In the 
end he left him with a charcoal burner’s wife in a wood, 
whose man was dead, and who wanted some living warmth 
to comfort her. For miles a stray cur limped at his heels, 
eating from his hand, warming his sleep; and one morning, 
when he woke, it had gone its ways. This grieved him, since 
he was used to speak to the dog, pouring out his thoughts, for 
hours, on the malice of men, to it; on God s existence, the 
carver’s craft, the breasts and lips of a knight’s young 
daughter, Julia, whom he had known long ago, in his 
youth. Like many other wanderers through the death Gold¬ 
mund had become a little crazed. None in this plague- 
stricken land had all their wits, and many were mad out and 
out. The young Jewess, Rebecca, may have been mad, the 
fair, dark maid, with glittering eyes, with whom he passed 
some days on the roads. 

He had found her in the fields, out beyond the gates of a 
little town, rocking and moaning, by the cinders of a 
burnt-out heap of logs, beating her face, and tearing at her 
long black hair. It was her hair first moved his heart, it 
looked so beautiful, and he caught her wild hands and held 
them fast, talked to the maid and, as he comforted, saw that 
her face and body were very fair. She raved with grief for 
her father whom the balks of the town had burnt to ashes, 
214 


along with fifteen other Jews. She had escaped, but then 
returned in desperation, and now lay howling out her grief 
that she had not let them burn her along with him. Patiendy 
he held her clawing hands, speaking soft words, muttering 
of pity and protection, and offering to do whatever she 
would. She asked his help to bury her father, and they 
gathered all the bones from the glowing ashes, carried them 
in secret into the fields, and there laid them in the earth. 
Then it was night, and Goldmund sought out a sleeping- 
place, heaped up a bed for the maid in a little oak wood, 
promised he would guard her sleep, and listened as she lay 
there sobbing, until at last sleep came and stilled her cries. 
He too slept for a while, and in the morning began to court 
her, telling her she could not stay there alone, she would be 
known for a Jewess and struck to, death, or vagabonds 
would come on her, and rape her, and in the woods there 
were wolves and gipsies. But he, he said, would bear her 
company, protecting her from beasts and humans, for she 
moved the pity in his heart; he had eyes in his head to see 
what beauty was, and never would he suffer those white 
shoulders and shining eyes to be the food of wolves, or burnt 
to ashes on a scaffold. She heard him sullenly to the end, 
then sprang up and ran away from him. He had to chase, 
and hold her, before she would listen. 

‘Rebecca,’ he said, ‘you see I mean you no harm. You 
are sad for thinking of your father, and will hear no word 
of any love. Bht tomorrow, or next day, or later, I’ll ask 
you again, and, till then, I’ll shield you, and bring you food, 
and never touch you. Mourn as long as you must! You can 
be either sad or merry with me, but always you shall only do 
what pleases you.’ 

AH this was spoken to the wind. She would do nothing, 
she said with stubborn rage, that could ever bring her joy 
again. She would do what brought her the worst agony, and 
the sooner tlie wolves had got her the greater her content 

',215 





would be. Let him go his ways; he should never have her. 
He had said too much to her already. 

‘Sweet,’ he answered, ‘can you not see that death is 
everywhere - that they are dying in all the housc.s of every 
town, that the whole world is full of cliirnour and grief? 
Even the rage of the fools who burned your father was 
nothing but their grief and need. It was all born of the same 
great pain. Listen ~ soon death will take us too, and then 
we shall lie out rotting in the fields, and wolves play at dice 
with our bones. Let us live, now while we may, and love 
each other. Oh, it were such pity, my love, for your white 
neck, and little feet. Sweetheart, come with me now, I will 
only watch you and protect you.’ 

He begged her long; till suddenly he remembered that 
it was useless to persuade with words, or any reasoning. 
Then he was silent, and stared glumly at her. Her dark, 
proud face was set in hate, 

‘So are you all,’ she said at last, in a voice of utter loath¬ 
ing and derision. ‘All you Christians arc tiie same. First you 
help a daughter to bury her father, slaugiiti:re(l by you and 
your like, whose little finger was worth all of you and 
have scarce done when the maid must be yours to lie with, 
and go out junketing at your side. So are yon all. At first 
I thought you might be a good man: but liow can any of 
you be good? Oh, you are swine.,’ 

As she said all this Ooldmund watclied her eyes, and saw 
something deeper than the hate in tticm; a thing which 
moved him to the heart. He s:iw deiitii again, there in her 
eyes; not the death which caniKrt be escaped, Init the: free¬ 
dom to die, the will, the longing for it, the Cjuiet, soft answer 
of resignation to the call of our mother, the eartli. 

‘Rebecca,’ he told her very gently, ‘you may Ik: right, 
and I a wicked man, although I meant only good to you. 
Forgive me, I have only just understood.’ 

He took off his cap and bowed very low, as though to a 
216 


princess, then left her, with an aching heart. For long his 
soul was full of pain, and he could not bear to speak to any¬ 
one. Little as they resembled one another, this poor, proud 
Jewess, in some strange fashion, put him in mind of Lydia, 
the knight’s daughter. It brought a man sorrow to love such 
women, and yet, for a while, it seemed to Goldmund that 
these were the only two he had ever loved; the poor, anxious 
Lydia, and this shrinking, bitter Jewish maid. 

For days he remembered this dark Jewess, and dreamt, for 
many nights after, of the fiery, lissom beauty of her body, 
fashioned, it seemed, for all desire, and yet given over to 
death. Oh that such lips and eyes should be formed to be 
the loot of ‘swine’, and then lie rotting in the fields. Was 
there no power, no magic in the world, to save such tender 
blossom of precious joy? 

Yes, there was one such magic. This loveliness must 
re-shape itself in his soul, his hands inform it, and preserve. 
With delight and fear he perceived how full his mind had 
grown of images, how many shapes this long, dread journey 
had left in.scribcd upon his heart. Forms thronged and 
jostled within him, till he longed for quiet, to see them all, 
and release them into living permanence. More eager, more 
alert, more curious, he went on, with searching eyes, and 
passionate .senses, but restless, now, for clay and wood, for 
paper, charcoal, and a workshop. 

The summer died. Many assured him that with the 
autumn, or early winter, the plague must end, It was au¬ 
tumn now, but with no joy in it. Goldmund came through 
empty, desolate country, with none to gather in its harvests, 
so that fruit dropped from the trees, and covered the grass. 
In many place.s it was plundered by savage bands from the 
town, consorting together to rob the land. Slowly he neared 
his destination, and would often fear, in these last days, to 
find himself tainted with the plague, and so be forced to die 
in a cow-stall, He feared death now, and shrank away from 
217 





it; he must live, to taste the one delight of standing again 
before a wood-block, and giving himself up to the carver’s 
craft. Now, for the first time in his life, the Empire was too 
broad, and the world too wide for him: no pleasant town 
could hold him now, no wench keep him longer than a 
night. 

One day he came to a church, on whose front, in deep 
niches, born up by columns, stood many rows of figures, cut 
in stone, fashioned in a very ancient time - figures of 
apostles, martyrs, angels, such as he had seen often before, 
in his own cloister-church in Mariabronn. As a boy he had 
taken a certain pleasure in tliem, although they never stirred 
him very deeply. They had seemed to him beautiful and 
worthy, yet a little too stiff, patriarchal, ceremonious, Later, 
at the end of his first great wandering, when he had been so 
moved to joy and wonder by Nicholas’ sweet and sorrow¬ 
ful Mother of God, he had found these old, solemn figures 
clumsy and heavy, too rigid, too remote from life, think¬ 
ing with a certain disdain of them, finding this new 
style of Master Nicholas a far more living, deeper, and rarer 
art. 

But as, today, after long experience, he came back to 
them, his soul scarred by the world, full of the urgent need 
for quiet and thought, their old, stern forms suddenly 
moved him, with a force and power he had never known. 
Piously he stood before their reverence, in which still beat 
the heart of a perished day, the fears and raptures of many 
dead, held in strong lines above the centuries, defying the 
brittleness of time. A feeling of deep awe and love of them 
stole into his heart as he gazed, and he shuddered at his 
wasted, burnt-out life. He did what he had not done these 
many years; accused himself, and longed for penances, 
sought out a'confessional and a priest. 

But, although the church had many shriving-stools, there 
was not a priest in them all: they were dead, or lying in 
218 


hospices; they had run far off, fearing the taint. The nave 
was empty, Goldmund’s steps rang in the vaultings. He 
knelt at an empty stool, and shut his eyes. Then he began 
to whisper through the lattice: 

‘Dear God, see what is become of me. I come back to 
You, an evil, useless man. I have flung away my youth, 
like a spendthrift, and now very little is left over. I have 
slain, I have stolen, I have whored. I have idled, and eaten 
the bread of others. God, why did You make us so? And 
why do You lead us by such ways? Are we not Your chil¬ 
dren? Did not Your Son go to death for us? Are there not 
saints and angels to watch over us? Or is it all a bundle of 
pretty tales, invented to keep the children quiet, at which 
shavelings laugh among themselves? Your works have con¬ 
fused me, God the Father. You have made the world very 
ill, and now You rule it very weakly. I have seen streets and 
houses full of dead men. I have seen the rich lock up their 
doors and fly, leaving the poor, their brothers, to rot un¬ 
buried. I have seen how men feared one another, how they 
struck down Jews like slaughtered cattle. I have seen so 
many innocent suffer and die, so many evil men wallow in 
sloth. Have You turned away, and left us utterly? Are 
Your own creatures of no more worth to You? Do You 
want men to perish from the world ? ’ 

Sighing he came out through the great doors: dumb rows 
of saints and angels towered above him, each set high in its 
narrow space, held in the long, stiff folds of their gowns; 
unchangeable, unattainable, greater than men. Stem and 
mute, in their narrow niches, deaf to every question and 
petition, yet they seemed eternally to comfort; the trium¬ 
phant conquerors of death, the rigid saviours from despair. 
They, in their dignity and beauty, had watched the crumb¬ 
ling generations. Ah, that poor Rebecca had been as they, 
poor Lene, charred to ashes in her hut, poor gentle Lydia, 
Master Nicholas 1 One day these, too, should stand and 
219 








abide: soon he would have fixed their memories, wliich 
now meant only love and grief to liirn, fear, and the longing 
to hold their shape. They, too, should comfort the living, 
alive with neither name nor history; tlie still, mute symbols 
of human days. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 


At last he had reached his journey’s end, and Goldmund, 
through the same gateway under which, so many years 
ago, he had hurried first into this city, to find a master and 
learn a craft, re-entered the place of his desire. He had been 
told that here, too, they had had the plague, and perhaps it 
reigned still. There had been risings and tumults, so that 
the Emperor had sent his Stattholder to quell them, and set 
up the law in its place again, protecting the lives and goods 
of honest citizens. The bishop had fled his city the instant 
he knew that the plague had entered it, and now lived out 
on the land, in one of his castles. Goldmund paid small 
heed to all this. Let it all go as it would, if only there were a 
city still, and his workshop! But when he reached the gates 
there was no more plague; the burghers were expecting 
their bishop’s return, and with it their settled, peaceful life. 
He rejoiced to see these streets again, and his heart leapt, 
as though for a home-coming, so that he had to master him¬ 
self, and frown a litde. 

It was all just as he had left it: the gates, the delicate 
fountains, the old, squat tower of the Minster, the long, 
.slender spire of St Mary’s church, the clear, bright chimes 
of St Lawrence, the wide and beautiful market-place. Oh, 
how good to feel it had all been waiting for him! Had he 
not dreamed, out there, that he came back only to find it 
shrivelled up, one half in ashes, the other full of unfamiliar 
houses. Fie almost wept as he passed along the street, recog¬ 
nizing house after house. After all, perhaps these burghers 
were to be envied for their calm, deep knowledge that they 
were at home, living their safe and peaceful lives, ensconced 


221 


in their workshops and houses, witli wives and children, 
journeymen and neighbours. 

It was late afternoon, siinligiit L'ly gold over tlie house- 
fronts, with their tavern-signs, and signs of guilds, tlieir 
carved doors, their rows of flowerpots on tlie lialconic;;. It all 
looked warm; there was nothing tlicre to remind him that- 
through these pleastint houses deatli had raged, ruling the 
panicked fears of mem Cool, clear green and blue, the river 
ran like glass under echoing arclies. Coldraund sat to rest 
on the river wall: down under layers of greenish crystal 
the same shadowy fish still glided; or they lay Inert, tlieir 
noses turned against the ciirrrent, and still, out of tlie shad¬ 
owed twilight around them, some pale gold ohject glittered 
here and there, promising much, and favouring di-etims. 

Though other wfiters had tlie like, and other towns and 
bridges were very fair, to Goldinund it seemed tliat not for 
years had he met any sight to ec|iial fliis, nor ever, except 
here, felt anything like it. Two latighiiig liutcher’s pren¬ 
tices came driving th(;ir cow across tlie bridge, Joking, and 
winking at a maid wlio, in a niciie in the wall ahove them, 
took in her washing. How lioon everything chaiiged! A 
short while ago tlie pkigue-fires liad livirned outside this city, 
and gruesome deiith-churls done their will in it. Now life 
flowed and hurried just as before, Peojile could laugh -- and 
he himself was like tliem, sitting there, rejoicing to see it all, 
as though there had been no pain or death in tlie world, 
no Lcne, no Jewish maid. He felt so glad that he even loved 
the citizens, stood up witli a smile, and went further, and 
not till he reached the street of Master Nidiolas, liy alley- 
ways which he had trodden each day on Ids way to work, 
did his heart begin to beat, and his mind grow restless. 

He quickened his pace, longing, even tonight, to speak 
to the Master. He must know for certain, could not lirook a 
second’s more delay: to wait another night seemed impos¬ 
sible. Was Nicholas angry still.i* Ah, it was all so long itgo, 


it could have no meaning any more. But if he stormed, 
Goldmund would mollify and placate him. All would be 
well if only the Master were still there - he and his work¬ 
shop ! Running, as though, even in .this last instant, he 
might come too late and lose some chance, he came to the 
house he knew so well, seized the latchet, and gave a little 
start, as he found the house-door locked against him. Was 
this ill-omened? In his day it had never happened that this 
door was bolted before dark. Trembling he crashed down 
the knocker, and waited. His heart stood still. 

There came the old serving-woman again, who had let 
him into the house that first time. Now she was no uglier 
than then, but older, and still more crotchety in her ways, 
and she did not seem to know who he was. In a low voice 
he demanded Master Nicholas. She squinted up, mistrust¬ 
fully and stupidly. 

‘Master? There’s no master here. Go your ways, man, 
no one is admitted.’ She tried to thrust him back from the 
doorway, but he caught her arm, and shouted in her ear: 

‘For God’s sake, Margrit, stop your whimpering! 1 am 
Goldmund. Don’t you know who it is? I must go in now to 
Master Nicholas.’ 

‘FIc’s dead, I tell you,’ she said grudgingly. ‘We’ve no 
Master Nicholas here. Be off with you now; I haven’t the 
time to stand here gossiping.’ 

Goldmund, with tumult in his soul, thrast the old woman 
aside, who hobbled after with many cries, and rushed down 
the dark passage to the workshop. That, too, was locked. 
FIc turned, and ran up the stairs, with the whining, chiding 
Margrit at his heels, and there in the half-liglit of the land¬ 
ing, stood the figures Master Nicholas had assembled. He 
stopped, and called for Mistre.ss Lisbeth. 

The door into the oakroom opened: Lisbeth came, and 
when at the second glance, he knew her, the sight of her 
pierced him to the heart. If, from the apprehension of that 
223 


222 



first minute when he found the stree^door bolted against 
him, everything in this house had seemed bewitched, a little | 

ghostly, as though in some uneasy dream, now, with his ; 

first sight of Lisbeth, a cold shiver ran along his^ sjune. Lis- 
beth, the proud, the beautiful, had shrunk into a timid, faded ; 

gentlewoman, in a black gown, with a yellowish, sickly face, j 

wit h no jewels now, with uncertain eyes and anxious mien. | 

‘Forgive me, Mistress,’ he said to her. ‘Margrit did not j 

want to let me in to you. You know me? Surely you must. j 

I’m Goldmund. Say-is it true your father’s dead?’ ^ t 

Her eyes said she knew him well, and that here his 
memory was unwelcome. ^ i 

‘So you are Goldraund, are you?’ - in her voice he could j 

still hear something of her pride - ‘You have given your- | 

self these pains for nothing. My father is dead.’ [■ 

‘But the workshop ? ’ he had to ask her. 1 

‘The workshop? Closed. You must go elsewhere if it’s | 
work you need.’ ; ! 

He strove not to let her see his grief. i 

‘Mistress Lisbeth,’ he said, in a friendly voice, ‘I am not 
come to ask you for work. I wanted to give you greeting - I 

you, and the Master. It irks me sore to have to liear you. I ; 

can see you have had much sorrow. If your father’s thankful j 

apprentice can do you a service - name it - it would be my 
recompense. Ah, Mistress Lisbeth, it breaks my heart to see 
you so... so deeply afflicted.’ i 

She stepped back into the shadow of the doorway, 

‘Thanks,’ she hesitated, ‘you can do him no further se^ i 

vice, or me either. Margrit will lead you into the .street.’ . 

Her voice had an evil ring, half fear, half malice. He 
could feel that, if she had had the courage for it, she would j 
have railed, and turned him from the house. ; : 

Old Margrit slammed the door behind him, and drew the 
bolts. Now he stood in the street and heard them still, like 
the double grating-down of a coffin lid. ■ I 

224 .. ' 


Slowly he returned to the river wall, and leant again above 
the water’s edge. The sun was down, a chill came off the 
river, the stone that touched him was like ice. The street 
behind had grown very silent, the current swirled around 
tlie piers; no sheen of gold off the dark waters. 

‘Oh,’ he thought, ‘if I could slip off this wall and vanish.’ 
Once more the world was full of death. An hour went by, 
and the dusk had gathered into darkness. He could weep 
at last; the warm drops splashed his hands and knees. He 
wept for Master Nicholas, who was dead, for Lisbeth’s 
beauty that had vanished, for Lene, for the Jewish maid, for 
Victor, for his own shrivelled, wasted days. 

Late that night he found a wine-cellar, where he had 
often drunk and diced with apprentices. The hostess knew 
him again: he begged for a slice of bread, which she gave 
him, and along with it a friendly cup of wine. Neither bread 
nor wine could he taste. He slept on a bench in her tavern. 
Early in the morning she waked him, and he gave her 
thanks, and said, ‘God’s speed’, On his way he finished the 
bread she had given him. 

He strayed about, and came to the Fish-Market. There 
stood the house where he had lodged. Two fishwives, by 
the fountain, hawked their wares. The fair, shimmering 
fish swam round and round in their tub. He saw it all in a 
dream, remembering his pity for the fish, his anger against 
the buyers and sellers. Then, so he thought, he had loitered, 
just as today, pitying fish, and wondering at their beauty; 
endless time had passed since then, and water flowed under 
bridges. He had been very sad, he still remembered, but 
strove in vain to capture the feeling that had made his heart 
so heavy, long ago. ‘So it is,’ he thought, ‘sadness withers, 
and even our despair shrivels up. Pain, like our joys, fades 
out and leaves us, losing all its depths and worth, till at last 
a day comes when we have forgotten what stung our hearts 
so many years before.’ Even pain crumbles avvay and 
225 



perishes. Would this today lose all its depths and meaning 
- this despair that Master Nicholas was dead, in anger 
against him; that now there was no workshop to take him 
in, bring back his delight in carving shapes, and rid him of 
his weight of images. Yes, there could be no doubt, even 
this bitter longing would age and tire, his need would all be 
forgotten, since nothing stays with us long, not even grief. 

As he stood there, watching the fish and thinking all this, 
he heard a shy, friendly voice, beside him. 

‘Goldmund,’ it said very softly, and he turned to see a 
timid, sickly girl, with wide and beautiful eyes, who had 
said his name. He did not know her. 

‘It is you, Goldmund?’ she asked in her small, shy voice. 
‘Since when have you been back in the city, then? Don’t 
you know me, Goldmund? I’m Marie.’ 

But still he could not remember. She had to say how she 
was the daughter of the guilder in whose house he had, 
lodged in the Fish-Market; how, early one morning, before 
he left them, she had risen from her bed to warm his milk in 
the kitchen. She blushed in telling him all this. 

Now he remembered; yes, it was Marie, the little, .sickly 
maid who had limped, and been so quiet and timid as she 
served him. He remembered it all; she had come to him 
in the early morning cool, and been very sorry to .see him 
go from them. She had brought him milk, and when he 
kissed her in exchange for it she had taken his kiss as rever¬ 
ently and quietly as if it had been the Blessed Ho.st. He had 
never once thought of her since. 

In those days she had been a child. Now she was grown 
into a woman with beautiful eyes, though still .she limped, 
and seemed a little doleful. He took her hand. It was good to 
find someone in the town who knew him still, and still had 
any love for him. 

Although he protested, Marie led him into their house. 
In the living-room, where still his picture hung and his ruby 
226 


glass stood over the chimney-piece, her parents bade him 
stay with them to dinner, and pressed him to remain a 
couple of days. All seemed very glad to see him again. Here, 
too, he learned how things had gone with Master Nicholas. 
The Master had not died of the plague, they said, it had 
been Mistress Lisbeth who sickened of it. She had lain near 
death; her father had worn himself out with grief and care 
of lier, and died before .she was quite well again, tier life 
was saved, but not her beauty. 

‘Now the workshop stands empty,’ said the guilder, ‘and 
for a good carver there would be a snug home, and money 
enough. Consider it, Goldmund. She would not say “no" 
to you. She has no choice now.’ 

He learned this and that of the plague-time; how first 
the rabble had fired a hospice, and then burned and looted 
a few rich houses, till for a while there was no safety or 
order within the walls, since the bishop and his men had 
taken flight. But then the Emperor, who happened to be 
near the city, had sent his stattholder, Count Fleinrich. 
Well, sure enough, this lord was resolute, and had soon 
brought the city to submission, with his riders, and his band 
of archers. But now it was time to be quit of him, and the 
city wanted its bishop back again: this count had laid con- 
tril3utions on the citizens, and they wearied both of him and 
Agnes, his doxy, She was a proper devil’s piece. But soon 
they would be gone, both he and .she; the city fathers had 
long grown weary of them, and of having, in place of their 
good bishop, this courtier and captain on their backs, a 
kaiser’s minion, who received ambassadors and churchmen 
like a prince. 

Then the guest was asked to tell of his travels. ‘Alas,’ 
he answered them, ‘no man could speak of it well., I went 
on and on, and in every place there was the plague; I saw 
corpses rotting by the roadside, and in cities the folk were 
mad, and evil with fear. I came out whole, and perhaps one 
227 




r;'"’ 

! ' 

day I shall forget it. Now I am here, to find my Master 

’’ dead. Let me bide with you, and rest a few days, before I 

; go on my way again,’ 

; But it was more than need that made him ask it. He 

■ stayed because he was sick at heart, and irresolute; because 

; the city, with its memory of better days, was dear to him, 

I and poor Marie’s love soothed his heart. He could not love 

1 ^ her in exchange, could give her nothing save friendship and 

I gentleness, yet her humble longing seemed to cherish him. 

I And, more than all, his burning wish to make images held 

I ' him back: even without a shop to work in, as a journeyman 

I even, he longed to stay in the city. 

For two whole days Goldmund did nothing but draw, 
j' I Marie had procured him pens and paper for it, and now, 

I ' hour after hour, he sat in his room, filling the wide reams 

1 with scribbled shapes, though some were careful and full of 

thought. He made many studies of Lene’s head, as he had 
j' , seen it after the death of the vagabond, smiling with trium- 

f , phantlove, exulting in tlie sight of death; of Lene’s head, as 

I it had looked on the night before she died, eager to return 

into the earth, already almost crumbling into formlessness. 

\ ' He drew a little boy he had once seen dead, stretched on the 

I ' threshold between two rooms, on his way to his parents, with 

( clenched fists* He drew a wagon full of corpses, with three 

; thin jades wearily tugging it, and churls running beside 

I ' to urge it on, long poles in their hands, and with squint- 

I ing eyes, glittering through the slits in the black plague- 

masks, Over and over again he drew Rebecca, the dark slim 
Jewess, whose eyes were fire, with her small, proud mouth, 
her face full of misery and defiance, her pure young body, 
shaped, it seemed, for nothing but love. He drew himself, as 
a wanderer, a lover, a fugitive, with reaping death hard at 
his heels; as a dancer at the feasts of the plague-stricken. 
Eagerly he bent over the paper, to fix, in long, firm strokes, 
the features of the pretty, disdainful Lisbeth he had known, 
228 




the broken grimaces of old Margrit, the admired form of 
Master Nicholas. And several times, in dim, uncertain out¬ 
lines, he suggested another face, a woman’s - mother earth, 
with hands folded in her lap, the ghost of a smile under 
heavy lids. This knowledge of the power in his hands, the 
mastery he had of all these faces, corriforted him more than 
any words. In two days he had covered every sheet that Marie 
brought him, while from the last he cut out a space, and on 
this, in a few clear strokes, drew Marie - her face with the 
beautiful eyes, and lips that renounced. This he gave her. 

This work had appeased him. For as long as he could stay 
there drawing he had not known where he sat, or what he 
suffered. His world had been nothing but a table, the white 
paper, a rush-light at dusk. Now he awoke to remember 
that his Master was dead, and that he must set forth on 
the roads again, and so began to stray about the city, with a 
strange sense of welcome and farewell. 

On one of these walks he met a lady, whose sight alone 
resolved the tumult in his mind. A fair woman, with light, 
gold hair, on horseback; with inquisitive, rather cold blue 
eyes, beautiful and strong, with a fresh, clear skin, a face all. 
eagerness for life, greed to enjoy and rule, self-reliance, and 
sensual curiosity. She sat her horse with an air of mastery 
and disdain, the look of one who commands by habit; yet 
with nothing reserved or guarded in her face and, beneath 
the rather cold light in her eyes, nostrils, which seemed flut- 
teringly eager to welcome every savour life could offer her, 
while her firm beautiful lips seemed to promise that she 
could give and take without stint. The sight of her made 
Goldmund feel alert - suddenly eager to measure himself 
against this woman’s pride, To win and master her seemed 
to him a glorious achievement, nor would he have thought it 
a bad death to forfeit his head in the attempt, At once he 
knew this strong, golden woman as his equal, rich in her 
senses and her heart, with the strength in her to weather any 



229 




storm, as wild in her loves as she was tender, sensing the i 
very tact and beat of passion from ancient inherited know¬ 
ledge of the blood. She rode on past him, and he watched 
her. Between her dark blue bodice and rough gold hair 
her firm, white neck rose proud and strong, yet cased in the j 

delicate skin of a child. She was, he thought, the fairest ; 

woman he had seen, and he longed to feel her neck under his j 

hands, and pluck the cold, blue mystery out of her eyes. ! 

Nor was he long in learning her name. He heard at once | 

that she was Agnes, the stattholder’s leman, who lived with | 

him in the bishop’s palace. The news did not alter his pur¬ 
pose, since she might have been the empress herself. He | 

stopped, to bend over a fountain, and see his image in the j 

water. The face he saw matched hers, as brother to sister, | 

but his was far too wild and unkempt. Within the hour he | 

had hunted up a barber and, by persuasion, had himself | 
oiled and combed, and his beard cut. | 

He spent two days in pursuit of her. Agnes would ride j 

out of the palace, to see this fair-haired stranger at the gates, r 

who stared at her with longing in his eyes. She would canter I 
her horse around the bastions, and the stranger would be i 
waiting under the elms, Agnes would have been at the gold¬ 
smith’s and, as she left his workshop, meet the stranger. Her 
proud blue eyes measured him sharply, yet her nostrils 
quivered a little as she stared. Next day, on her early ride, 
she met him again, and smiled a challenge as .she pas.scd. ■ 
With her he saw the count, the stattholder, a bold and : 

stately man, and a serious enemy, l^ut his hair had grey in ; 

it already, and creases of care under the eyes. Goldmund 
could feel himself a match for him. | 

These days filled him with delight, he rejoiced in a sense j 
of new-won youth. It was very good to draw this woman on, 
and challenge her, good to risk his freedom for this beauty. 

Best and pleasantest of all was his sense of setting his life on 
tliis one throw, 


On the morning of the third day, Agnes rode forth from 
the castle yard followed by a groom on horseback. .She 
looked at once, a little restlessly, for the stranger, as though 
she were eager to do battle, Her groom was sent ahead with 
a message, and she walked her horse slowly after him, under 
the gateway, to the bridge, and over it. Only once did she 
look behind her to see that the stranger vvas at her heels. In 
the street to St Vitus, the pilgrims’ church, at that time of 
day almost deserted, she reined up, and waited his approach. 
She had nearly half an hour to wait for him, since he fol¬ 
lowed her very slowly, refusing to approach her breathless. 
He came, smiling and radiant, with a little bunch of red hips 
and haws between his teeth. She had slid from her horse, 
and tethered it, and now stood with her back against the 
ivy that climbed up the steep church bastion. She looked 
her pursuer in the eyes, tie faced her gaze, and doffed his 
cap. 

‘Why do you hunt me?’ she asked him. ‘What do you 
want of me?’ 

‘Oil,’ he replied, ‘I would as lief make you a gift as take 
one. It is myself I would offer you, fair woman, and then you 
shall do as you will with me,’ 

‘Well, I shall see what use lean put you to I But if you 
thought you could come out plucking flowers without dan¬ 
ger, you were wrong. I can only love those who risk their 
lives for me if they must.’ 

‘Mine is yours to command.’ 

Slowly she drew a tliin gold chain from her neck. 

‘What do they call you?’ 

‘Goldmund.’ 

‘Goldmund - good; I must taste how golden is that month 
of yours. Now li.sten well. You arc to bring this chain at 
dusk to the palace, and say you found it. You will not let 
it leave your hands. I must have it back from you alone. 
You are to come to me just as you are, even though they 
231 


230 



take you for a beggar. If any of the palace-rabble come sniff¬ 
ing you, bear with them. Know that only two of my people 
are trustworthy, the squire, Max, and Bertha, my woman. 
One of these two you must seek out, and have yourself led 
to me, Be on your guard against all the others, and the count 
himself; they are your enemies. You are warned; it may 
cost you your neck.’ 

She held out her hand for him to kiss, and he took it 
smiling, stroked it against his cheek, and kissed it tenderly. 
Then he hid her chain and left her, walking downhill into 
the city, with city and river spread beneath him. The vines 
were already stripped: one gold leaf fluttered past another 
off the trees. He smiled again and nodded at these streets, 
lying there so snug and friendly. Only a few days back he 
had been all sorrow, sick at heart that even pain and grief 
pass over us, leaving no trace. Now these were gone indeed; 
they had fluttered down, like the gold leaves off the 
branches, yet never, he thought, had love promised so much 
as it did in the eyes of this woman, whose tall beauty and 
golden fullness of life put him in mind of the imiige of his 
mother, as he had seen it long ago as a child in Mariabronn, 
when first he knew he carried it in his heart. Even two days 
since he would not have believed that the world could ever 
again seem young and vivid, nor the sap of life ri.se in him so 
mightily, with all the eager pleasure of his youth, setting 
new fire in every vein. How glorious to know he was .still 
alive, to know that death had passed him by, in all the crazy 
horror of these months. 

That evening he stole into the palace. Its great court¬ 
yard was full of stir and bustle, palfreys vt'ere being stripped 
of their trappings, messengers hurried to and fro, while 
ti little procession of monks and ghostly dignitaries followed 
servants through the doors, and up the staircase. Goldmund 
tried to enter after them, but found that a porter barred his 
way. 

232 


He brought out his chain, saying that he had commission 
to give it to none hut the Lady Agnes, or her tire-woman. 
They gave Iiim a groom to take him further, who left him in 
one of the long passages, Then came a nimble, beautiful 
woman, who whispered, a.s she hurried past, ‘Are you Gold¬ 
mund?’ - and beckoned him to follow in her wake. She 
vanished quickly through a side door, came back after a 
wliile, and called him in. He found himself in a little room, 
with a .scent of fur and sweet essences, and hung about with 
robes and mantles; women’s hats were set out on wooden 
stands, and many pairs of shoes in an open trough. Here he 
stood wailing a long half-hour, sniffed at the scented robes 
that hung about him, stroking their fur, and smiled inquisi¬ 
tively on all tlie pretty gauds that dangled down. 

At last the inner door was opened and there came, not the 
tire-woman hut Agnes, in a sky-blue robe, with white fur 
at her neck. Slowly she jipproached the waiting Goldmund, 
step by step, and her deep blue eyes measured him gravely, 

‘You luive had to wait,’ she said in a low voice, ‘but I 
thii'ilv we are safe at lust. An embassy of prelates is with the 
count. He must sup with them, and they will have much 
business together. Priests always draw out their sessions. 
This hour is yours and mine. Welcome, Goldmund.’ 

She stood beside him, her greedy lips bent close, and 
witliout more words they greeted in a kiss. Softly his fingers 
stroked her nafie. She led him out of the wardrobe into her 
sleeping-chamber, high, and bright with many tapers. Food 
had been set out on one of the tables. They sat, and she 
.spread Imtter on wheaten cakes for him, with flesh, and gold 
wine in a higii, blue-tinged glass. They ate and drank, both 
from the .satne azure cup, their hands caressing, by way of 
trial. 

‘What made you fly into my nest,’ she asked him, ‘my 
pretty bird? Arc you a .soldier of a spielmann; or are you 
some poor vagabond off the roads?’ 

233 




‘I am all that you will,’ he answered softly, ‘and am all 
yours. I am a spielmann, if you will, and you are my sweet S 
lute, so that when I touch your neck with my fingers, and 
play on you, we can hear the angels, how they sing! Come 
my heart - I am not here to eat your wheaten cakes and 
drink your wine. I came only for you.’ 

Gently he unclasped the white fur at her neck and m- I 
sheathed her body. Though around them priests and cour- | 
'tiers might hold session, servants come creeping up the ■ 
passages, the sickle moon drop far into the branches in the 
courtyard, these two knew nodiing of all this. For them the ; 

trees of Paradise were in blossom. Drawn and clasped to one ■ 

another, they lost themselves within its scented night, saw [ 
the white, shimmering secrets of its flowers, plucking its i 

fruits, for which they thirsted, with gende, ever-grateful, ' 

hands. Never before had spielmann struck such a lute, or 1 

lute known fingers so strong and cunning. 

‘Goldmund,’ she whispered, full of ecstasy, ‘Oh, what a 
sorcerer have I found. I would have a child of you, my sweet ' 
goldfish. Or better, I would die under your kisses.’ i 

Deep in his throat he hummed a song of joy to her, as he : 

saw the hardness melt in her deep, blue eyes, felt how love j 

weakened all her body. In a gentle shudder, like a death- j 

pang, her eyes drank his love into their depths, filmed, as j 

with the trembling sheen on the glittering scales of dying i 

fish, faint gold, like the magic shimmer in deep water. All ; 

human joy seemed gadiered into that hour. t 

Then at once, as she still lay trembling with closed eyes, i 
he stole from the bed, and slipped into his clothes. He I^nt ! 
over her with a sigh, and whispered: J 

T must leave you, my jewel. Your count mustn’t come | 

and kill me. Why should I die, when first I would make us j 

happy again-once more-a hundred times more.’ I 

She lay there silent till, he was ready. He drew the soft | 
coverlet over her, kissed her eyes. i 

234 ' ! 


, ‘Goldmund,’ she sighed. ‘Oh, must you leave me? Come 
tomorrow. If there’s danger I’ll send to warn you. Come 
soon. Come soon.’ 

She tugged the bell-cord. Her tire-woman came to the 
wardrobe door to guide him, and led him quickly from the 
palace. He would have liked to give her a gold ducat; for a 
minute he was ashamed of his poverty. 

Late that night he stood in the Fish-Market, looking up at 
the windows of his lodging, They would all be asleep, and 
it seemed he must lie down in the square. But, strangely, 
he found the house-door open, and crept in, shutting it 
softly after him. The way to his room lay through the kit¬ 
chen. There was light there, and he found Marie, sitting, 
with her tiny lamp, at the table. She had nodded off to sleep 
as she waited for him. She started up as he came through. 

‘Oh,’ he said, ‘Marie - are you up still ? ’ 

‘Yes,’ she told him, ‘or else you would have found the 
house locked up.’ 

‘I’m sorry you waited for me, Marie. It’s so late now. 
Don’t be angry.’ 

‘I’m never angry with you, Goldmund. I only feel a little 
sad.’ 

‘Sad you shall never be. Why sad?’ 

‘0, Goldmund, how I wish I were strong and beautiful. 
Then you need never go out at night, courting other women 
in strange houses. You would stay with me; and perhaps 
you would sometimes be a little kind to me.’ 

Her gentle voice had neither hope nor bitterness in it, 
only sorrow. He stood uneasily. She irked him, and he could 
find no words to'answer her. With a gentle hand he stroked 
her hair, and she was silent, trembling a little as she 
felt him. She wept a while, then dried her eyes and said 
shyly: 

‘Go to bed now, Goldmund. I’ve only been saying a lot 
of foolishness. I felt so sleepy. Good night’ 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 


Goldmund spent a day of impatient happiness in the hills. 
If he had had a horse he would'have ridden out that day 
to the cloister, to the Sorrowful Madonna of Master Nicho¬ 
las. He longed to see her again, and seemed to remember 
that in the night he had had a dream of the dead Master. 
Well, he must go back to her later. Even should this happi¬ 
ness soon be over, should Agnes’ love prove evil in the end - 
today she was in his blood, he could not miss an instant of 
her. 

This morning he wanted to speak to nobody, but to 
spend this warm, autumn day with trees and clouds. He said 
to Marie that he wanted a day in the woods, and might not. 
come back till late that night. Would she give him a good 
loaf to take with him, and not sit up, this time, for his re¬ 
turn? She did not answer, only filled his pockets with bread 
and apples, brushed down his old, shabby jerkin, which she 
had patched the first day he came back to them, and let him 

go- 

He crossed the river and climbed through empty vine¬ 
yards, up, by their steep earthen steps, into the hills, losing 
himself, above, in the woods, and never stopped till he stood 
high up at the summit. The sun shone warm through bare 
branches, ouzels scurried off as he passed, to sit in the midst 
of their thickets, staring timidly out, through round, black 
eyes; while far below, in a long, blue curve, flowed the 
river, and the city lay, like a little, built-up toy. No sound 
of it could reach him here, save only the bells, tolling to 
prayers. 

Here at the summit there were mounds grown over with 
236 


turf, from the old heathen days, long ago; fortresses per¬ 
haps, or graves. On one of these he stretched himself out in 
the sunshine, where he could lie in the dry rustling autumn 
grass and see out across the whole wide valley, with hills 
and mountains over beyond the river, chain after chain, till 
peaks and sky hovered in a misty uncertainty. Through all 
the wide country stretched beneath him, and further still, 
his feet had strayed: all that, now memory and far off, had 
once been close, and in the present. He had slept a hundred 
times in those far woods, eaten berries, hungered in them, 
and frozen, toiled over the brows of those hills, been gay or 
merry, tired or vigorous. Somewhere, away among those dis¬ 
tances, lay the charred bones of poor dead Lene; some¬ 
where over there his companion, Robert, must wander still, 
if the plague had not stayed his feet; there, out of sight, 
Victor lay dead. Somewhere, enchanted and far off, there 
stood the cloister of his boyhood, somewhere the castle of 
the knight, in which he had lain with two young daugh¬ 
ters : there, in rags and hunted, ran poor Rebecca, or else 
lay dead. These many places, set so far apart, these moors 
and forests, villages and cities, walled towns and cloisters - 
all these people, who might be either dead or still alive - in 
him were ever-present, and reunited. They dwelt together in 
his memory, his love, his longing, his regret. If he died to¬ 
morrow they would all separate, be lost again, and the pic¬ 
tures in the book wiped out, of women, love, and winter 
nights, and summer mornings. Oh, it was high time to 
accomplish something, carve out some figures to leave be¬ 
hind him; something with longer life in it than he. Small 
fruit was born of all these wanderings, these years since he 
escaped into the world. He had saved so little from time; a 
few figures, carved and left in a workshop, the best of them 
all his Johannes - and now this unreal picture-book in his 
head, his fair and agonized image-world of memories. 
Could he ever manage to rescue some of them, setting them 

237 


N.a-i2 


forth, for all to see? Or would his life go on like this to the 
end, always with new cities, new country, new women, 
fresh experience, other pictures, one piled up over the other, 
from which at last he would have nothing, save the restless, 
painful beauty in his heart? Life tricked so shamelessly. It 
was enough to make men laugh or weep. A man could live, 
letting his senses have free rein, sucking his fill at the breasts 
of Eve, his mother - and then, though he might revel and 
enjoy, there was no protection against her transcience, and 
so, like a toadstool in the woods, he shimmered today in the 
fairest colours, tomorrow rotted, and fell to dust. 

Or he could set up his defences against life, lock himself 
into a workshop, and seek to build a monument beyond 
time. And then life herself must be renounced; the man was 
nothing but her instrument: though he might serve eternity 
he withered, he lost his freedom, fullness, and joy of days. 
Such had been the fate of Master Nicholas. 

And yet our days had only a meaning if both these goods 
could be achieved, and life herself had not been cleft by the 
barren division of alternatives. To work and yet not pay 
life’s price for working: to live, yet not renounce the work 
of creation. Could it ever be done? 

Some men could do it, perhaps. There might be husbands, 
and honest fathers of families in the world, whose senses 
had not been blunted by their fidelity. There might be in¬ 
dustrious burghers whose hearts had not been tamed and 
rendered barren, by their lack of danger and its freedom. 
Perhaps. He had met none yet. , 

All being, it seemed, was built on opposites, on division. 
Man or woman, vagabond or citizen, lover or thinker - no 
breath could be both in and out, none could be man and 
wife, free and yet orderly, knowing the urge of life and the 
joy of intellect. Always the one paid for the other, though 
each was equally precious and essential. Perhaps it was 
easier for women. Nature had made them so that, with 
238 


j. them, their passion brought its fruit, and so a child was born 

i out of their happiness. Men had no such simple fruitfulness, 

; but instead, an eternal craving, never appeased. Was the 

! god who fashioned all this malicious and evil - did he laugh 

I at the pain in his own creation? No, it could be no evil god 

I who had made the roes and harts in the forest, fishes and 
j birds, trees and flowers, spring and autumn. And yet this 

!• cleft ran through his work, whether it were less perfect than 

; his intention, or he, the god, had a hidden purpose in this 

!• lack, this never-satisfied hunger in all his kind. Perhaps it 

i was a seed, sown by the enemy: original sin. But were not 

j all beauty and sanctity born of this same ‘sin’ in human 

i, beings, all that man had fashioned with his hands, and then 

I given it back to the god? 

j Sad with these thoughts, he turned his eyes upon the city, 

: spied out the market, and the fish-market, the bridges, 

!: churches, and council-house. Then he saw the bishop’s 

stately palace, where now Count Heinrich held his court. 

; Among these towers, beneath these long, sloping roofs, 
f dwelt Agnes, fairer than any queen, who looked so proud, 

j. . and could be so lost and humbled by her love. He remem- 

' bered last night with grateful joy. To have felt the glory of 

I tlrat one night every love in his past had been necessary, all 
I his schooling in women for this one woman, all that he had 

1 : learned in need and wandering, every night through which 

y he had had to tramp in snow, his kinship with beasts and 
I flowers, trees, and waters, butterflies and fishes. It had 

I needed all the quickened lust of senses sharpened by danger 

j as by love, all tire cravings of a lonely wanderer, the image- 

i world, graven within him by the years, to bring this woman 

I so much joy. For so long as his days remained a garden in 

; which such flowers as Agnes still could flourish, he need 

I not complain. 

y He wandered the whole day long on autumn summits, 

I walking, resting, eating bread, thinking of Agnes and the 
239 


i 




night. By sundown lie was back in the city, before the ca.stle. 
It was chilly now, and houses stared with fixed red eyes 
through the dark. A troop of little boys came singing past 
him, carrying turnips, cut into faces, on poles, which they 
waved aloft, with flaming torches stuck in the heads. This 
little rout of mummers brought winter with it, and Gokl- 
mund let it pass him with a smile. For a time he loitered 
outside the palace. The embassy of prelates was still with 
the count, and, here and there, at one of the high windows, 
a ghostly father stood, looking out. Goldtnund, at last, suc¬ 
ceeded in creeping through the door and, within, found 
the tire-woman, Bertha. Once again she hid him in her 
wardrobe, till Agnes came, and led him softly into the bed¬ 
chamber. Tenderly her beauty welcomed him, but .she was 
sad, her mind was full of cares, and he had great pains to 
cheer her a little. Slowly, under his kisses and love-words, 
she roused herself, and began to take comfort. 

‘You can be so gentle,’ she told him gratefully, ‘you have 
such deep, sure notes in your voice, my bird, when you 
prattle and chirrup, deep in your throat:. I love you, Gold- 
mund. Oh, if wc were only away from here! I hate it here, 
though soon it will be over, anyway. The count is sum¬ 
moned back to the Emperor, and the silly bishop will soon 
be here again. But today the count is surly, the pric.sts have 
angered him. Oh, Goldmund, never let him .see you! You 
would not live another hour, I fear so much what may 
happen.’ 

He remembered a half-forgotten voice - .surely he had 
heard this song already I Lydia had said .such things to him, 
with the same gentle, fearful, loving sadness. It was thus 
she had come stealing to his bedside, full of love yet rest¬ 
less with her fears. It pleased him, this anxious, tender .song. 
What worth were any love without its secrecy.? Could there 
be any love without love’s dangers? Gently he drew her 
close, stroking her, holding her hands, murmuring small 
240 


i 


enticements in lier ears, kissing her eyebrows. It touched, 
and filled him with delight, to find her so uneasy and full 
of care. Gratefully, almost with humility, she, took and 
.answered his caresses, preening herself against him, full of 
love, although she could find no merriment or peace. 
Suddenly she .started wildly: somewhere, not far off, a 
door slammed to, and quick steps came towards the bed¬ 
room. 


‘Oil God, he’s here!’ she whispered desperately, ‘the 
count! Quick - you can .slip out through the wardrobe. 
Don’t betray me.’ 

Already .slie had tlirust him among her robes, and he 
stood alone, fumbling in the darkness. From the room be¬ 
yond, the count’s loud voice was heard, with Agnes. He felt 
his way from gown to gown, gingerly, one foot before the 
otlier. Now he wa.s beside the passage door, and gently 
tried to pul! it ojien. Only then, as lie found it locked on the 
further side, did he too start, and his heart stand still, then 
suddenly beat wildly and |)ainfu!ly, It might be by some un¬ 
lucky chance that tins door had been locked .since he 
entered; he could not tliink it. He had walked into a trap, 
and was lost. Someone must have watched him creep in 
hero. It would cost him his neck, Fie remembered her last 
words, ‘Don’t betray rm:.’ No - he would not... he set his 
teetli and waited. His heart still thumped, but fresh resolu¬ 
tion steeled him. 

All this liad only lasted a few instants. Now the hither 
door wa.s thrust open, arid from Agnes’ cliamber came the 
count, with a torch and a drawn sword. Goldmund, in the 
very last instant, snatched robes and cloaks off the pegs, and 
huddled tliem togetlier, over his arm, Let them take him 
for a thief; perhaps it; would be a way out. 

I1ie count: liad spied him at once. Fie came on slowly. 

‘Who are you, sirrah. What are you doing? Answer me, 
or I thrust again.st you.’ 




241 



night. By sundown he was back in the city, before the castle. 
It was chilly now, and houses stared with fixed red eyes 
through the dark. A troop of little boys came singing past 
him, carrying turnips, cut into faces, on poles, which they 
waved aloft, with flaming torches stuck in the heads. This 
little rout of mummers brought winter with it, and Gold- 
mund let it pass him with a smile. For a time he loitered 
outside the palace. The embassy of prelates was still with 
the count, and, here and there, at one of the high windows, 
a ghostly father stood, looking out. Goldmund, at last, suc¬ 
ceeded in creeping through the door and, within, found 
the tire-woman, Bertha. Once again she hid him in her 
wardrobe, till Agnes came, and led him softly into the bed¬ 
chamber. Tenderly her beauty welcomed him, but she was 
sad, her mind was full of cares, and he had great pains to 
cheer her a little. Slowly, under his kisses and love-words, 
she roused herself, and began to take comfort. 

‘You can be so gentle,’ she told him gratefully, ‘you have 
such deep, sure notes in your voice, my bird, when you 
prattle and chirrup, deep in your throat. I love you, Gold¬ 
mund. Oh, if we were only away from here! I hate it here, 
though soon it will be over, anyway. The count is sum¬ 
moned back to the Emperor, and the silly bishop will soon 
be here again. But today the count is surly, the priests have 
angered him. Oh, Goldmund, never let him see you! You 
would not live another hour. I fear so much what may 
happen.’ 

He remembered a half-forgotten voice - surely he had 
heard this song already! Lydia had said such things to him, 
with the same gentle, fearful, loving sadness. It was thus 
she had come stealing to his bedside, full of love yet rest¬ 
less with her fears. It pleased him, this anxious, tender song. . 
What worth were any love without its secrecy? Could there 
be any love without love’s dangers? Gently he drew her 
close, stroking her, holding her hands, murmuring small 

240 


enticements in her ears, kissing her eyebrows. It touched, 
and filled him with delight, to find her so uneasy and full 
of care. Gratefully, almost with humility, she took and 
answered his caresses, preening herself against him, full of 
love, although she could find no merriment or peace. 
Suddenly she started wildly; somewhere, not far off, a 
door slammed to, and quick steps came towards the bed¬ 
room. 

‘Oh God, he’s here!’ she whispered desperately, ‘the 
count! Quick - you can slip out through the wardrobe. 
Don’t betray me.’ 

Already she had thrust him among her robes, and he 
stood alone, fumbling in the darkness. From the room be¬ 
yond, the count’s loud voice was heard, with Agnes, He felt 
his way from gown to gown, gingerly, one foot before the 
other. Now he was beside the passage door, and gently 
tried to pull it open. Only then, as he found it locked on the 
further side, did he too start, and his heart stand still, then 
suddenly beat wildly and painfully. It might be by some un¬ 
lucky chance that this door had been locked since he 
entered; he could not think it. He had walked into a trap, 
and was lost. Someone must have watched him creep in 
here. It would cost him his neck. He remembered her last 
words, ‘Don’t betray me.’ No - he would not... he set his 
teeth and waited. Flis heart still thumped, but fresh resolu¬ 
tion steeled him. 

All this had only lasted a few instants. Now the hither 
door was thrust open, and from Agnes’ chamber came the 
count, with a torch and a drawn sword. Goldmund, in the 
very last instant, snatched robes and cloaks oil the pegs, and 
huddled them together, over his arm. Let them take him 
for a thief; perhaps it would be a way out. 

The count had spied him at once. He came on slowly. 

‘Who are you, sirrah. What are you doing? Answer me, 
or I thrust against you.’ 


241 




‘Forgive me,’ Goldmnnd mumbled, ‘I am a poor man, 
lord, and you are so rich, I’ll give it all back, See here.’ 

He laid the robes on the floor. 

‘So - a thief, Is that it.? You were a fool to lose your life 
for a few old cloak,s. Are you a citizen here?’ 

‘No, lord -1 am homeless.... A poor man.... You will 
be merciful?’ 

‘Silence. One other thing you shall tell me. Were you 
saucy enough to accost the gracious lady? But, since you’ll, 
hang in any case, we need go no further into that. Yotir 
theft suffices.’ 

He hammered on the locked door into the pasjsage. 

‘You out there - unlock the door.’ 

The door was opened from outside. Three churls with 
drawn daggers stood in readiness. 

‘Tie him fast,’ bellowed the count, in a voice hoarse with 
anger and disdain. ‘This knave crept in here to steal. Lock 
him up, and, tomorrow at daybreak, set the cur dangling 
from the gallows.’ 

Goldmund’s wrists were tied, without any protest from 
him, He was led off down the long passage, down step.s, 
across the inner courtyard, with a varlet in front, bearing a 
torch. They halted at an arched cellar-door, thick-studded 
with nails, and began to gossip. This door had no key to it. 
One took the torch, and the varlet ran back to fetch the key. 
Thus they stood, waiting outside his prison, the three 
armed men and their prisoner. 

The torch-bearer examined Goldmund curiously, holding 
the light close to his face. In that instant came two priests 
over the courtyard, of whom there were so many as guests in 
the castle. They had come from the chapel, and halted 
now before the group, drawn by the light, and this night- 
scene: the three armed churls with a bound prisoner, who 
stood there waitingfor the key, ' 

Goldmund did not heed these priests, or give any answer 
242 ■ 


to his gaolers. He saw nothing but the flame in the wind, 
held close before his eyes, and blinding him. Behind this 
waving light came glimpses of a terrible darkness, fading off 
into something huge and monstrous - a shapeless, horrible 
apparition; the hole into which he would fall, the abyss, the 
end, He was deaf and blind to all but that. One of the priests 
had begun to question a churl. When he learned that this 
was a thief, and must hang at daybreak, he asked if the 
fellow had had a confes.sor. No, they replied, he had just 
been caught red-handed. ‘Then,’ said the father, ‘tomorrow 
1 will come to him early, before first mass, with the last sacra¬ 
ments, to shrive him. You are to answer for his not being 
led out to death until I have seen him and done this. I will 
speak to my lord the count of it tonight. This man may be 
a thief, but he has the right of every Christian to confess, 
and make his peace with God.’ 

The gaolers dared no contradiction. They knew this priest 
for one of the embassy, and had seen him dine with tlie 
count, at the high table. Besides, why should this poor knave 
not have his priest and his assoilment? 

The Paters went their way. Goldmund had heeded none 
of this. At last the servant returned, and the door was 
opened. They led the prisoner down to a vaulted chamber; 
he stumbled as they pushed him down the steps. A few 
three-legged stools stood round a table, since this was the 
outer vault of a wine-cellar. They pointed to a stool and 
bade lum sit. ‘There’ll be a priest,’ said one, ‘in the morning 
to shrive you.’ Then they went out, carefully locking the 
heavy door. 

‘Leave us a light, brother,’ Goldmund begged. 

‘No, little brother, you might do harm with it. You’ll 
be well enough. Be wise, and accustom younself. And how 
long would a rush-light last you? In an hour it would be out, 
Goodnight.’ 

Now he sat alone in the dark. He laid his head down on 
243 




the table: it was cramped and painful to sit thus, and the 
thongs on his wrists seared like flames. But this he only 
knew much later. At first he sat, with his forehead on the 
table as though upon a headsman’s block, striving to make 
his body and senses realize all that was now imposed upon 
his mind. He must bow his will, and give himself up to 
what would be - make himself know how soon he would be 
dead. 

He sat on thus a long while, miserably cramped, and 
striving with all his might to take this horror into himself, 
and know it; breathe it, let it fill him from top to toe. Night 
was around him, and the end of that night would bring 
more darkness. He must strive to learn that tomorrow he 
would have ceased to be. There he would dangle, and be a 
thing, on which birds could perch, and peck their fill of it; 
he would be as Master Nicholas was, as Lene was, lying in 
her ashes, as all those many hundreds had been, at whom he 
had stared in empty, plague-stricken houses, or heaped, one 
over the other, on the death-carts. It was hard to make him¬ 
self feel it deeply, let it become a part of his being. It was 
even impossible to think of it. There were so many thing,? 
from which he had never managed to free his heart, of 
which he had taken no farewell. These night-hours were 
granted him for this. 

First he must take his leave of Agnes. He would never 
see her tall beauty again, her sunny yellow hair, her cold 
blue eyes; nor watch the trembling pride die out of them, 
know the sweet, pale gleam of scented flesh. He had hoped 
to kiss her again so often. Ah, even today out in the hills, in 
the warm autumn sunlight, how he had thought of her; 
how he had longed for her, needed her. But hills, and sun, 
and blue, white-clouded sky - of all that too he mu,st take 
his leave. No trees, no woods, no wandering, no day or 
night, no seasons any more. Perhaps Marie would still be 
waiting up for him, poor Marie, with her limp and her 
244 


gentle eyes, dozing and waking in the kitchen, and still no 
Goldmund had come home, 

Ah, and those sheets with all the drawings, his hopes of 
figures he would carve. Gone! Gone! And his other hope 
of seeing Narziss, St John the beloved - he must forget it. 

Then he must take leave of his hands, his eyes; of thirst 
and hunger, food and drink, of love and lute-playing, .sleep 
and waking: of all. Tomorrow a bird would skim through 
the air, and Goldmund have no eyes to watch it with, a girl 
stand singing at her window, and he have no ears for her 
song; the river would flow on and on, the dumb, shadowy 
fish swim witli it, a wind spring up, and strip the yellow 
leaves to earth; there would be a moon, and glittering stars, 
young men would go out to dance at Christmas fairs, the 
first snow.s whiten the distant hills - and all these things 
would he for ever, each tree spreading out its shadow, men 
with joy or mirth in their living eyes, and all without him; 
none of it hisl They would have torn his body away from 
it. 

He seemed to taste the morning wind on moors, the sweet 
new wine, and young, firm walnuts, while into his fearful 
heart, like a memory, there crept the sudden realization of 
all the colour in the world, a dying pageant of farewells as 
the wild beauty of earth swept through his senses. He 
hunched himself up and broke into sobs, could feel tears 
scald and trickle down his cheeks; moaning, he let this wave 
of grief sweep over him, crouched, and gave himself up to 
cndle,ss woe. Alas, you valleys and wooded hills, you streams 
grown about with alders, you maids at night, on moonlit 
liridges, fair, glittering world of living things. How shall I 
go from you? 

He l.'iy and wept, bent far over the table, a child refusing 
to be comforted, called from his direst grief, in a sigh born 
of the deepest need: 'Oh mother! Oh mother! ’ 

An image answered this magic name as he said it, her 
245 




shape, from the secrecy of his heart. Not the mother he had 
longed to carve in wood, the Eve of his craftsman’s thoughts 
and dreams, but the very mother he remembered, clearer 
and more living than he had seen her since the dream he had 
had of her in Mariabronn. To her he complained, sobbed 
out this intolerable thought, gave himself over to her pro- 
tecdon, gave her the sunshine and the woods, his eyes, his 
hands, his life, into her care again. 

In the midst of his tears he fell asleep. Exhaustion en¬ 
folded him like her arms. Lulled by her, and rescued from 
his grief, for an hour or two he slumbered heavily. 

Then he awoke in the sharpest pain. His fettered wrists 
still burned like fire, while down his back and shoulders 
ran darting agony. He sat up stiffly, and knew the reality 
that surrounded him. He was in the midst of utter black¬ 
ness, could not tell how long he had been asleep, nor how 
many hours of life might still be left him. They might come 
any instant now! He remembered the priest who had been 
promised him. 

Not that his sacraments meant much; nor could he tell 
if even the most perfect assoilraent would bring his soul 
into a heaven. He did not care if any heaven existed, or the 
Father with His judgements, or any eternity. All this had 
long been hazy in his mind. 

He had no care for any heaven. He wanted nothing but 
the passing, uncertain life of earth - but to breathe, and be 

at home in his own skin. He wanted nothing but to live! 

Crazed with sudden terror he stood up, and fumbled 
through the blackness to the wall, leaned against the stone, 
and started to think. Surely there must be a hope. This 
priest might bring him a reprieve. Perhaps he was so sure 
of the prisoner’s innocence that he had put in a word on his 
behalf, would manage a delay, and help his escape. He set 
his whole mmd on this one thought, thinking it again and 
again. Even if all that should prove nothing, still his game 
246 


was not lost, he would go on hoping. First, then, he must 
win over this priest, strain every nerve to charm, and flatter 
and convince him. Everything else was dream and possi¬ 
bility; the priest was the one good card left in his hands, 
though none the less, there were still hazards and chances. 
The hangman might be sick of a colic, the gallows break, 
some accident, none of them had foreseen, bring him his 
chance to get away. Never would he let them hang him I 
He had striven in vain to accept this destiny, now he would 
keep it off to the very end, trip up his gaoler, knock the 
hangman down, struggle to the last drop of his blood. Ah, 
if he could only bring this priest to the point of untying 
these cord,s! 

How infinitely much would be gained by that! Mean¬ 
while, not caring for any pain, he .struggled to sever them, 
with his teeth. 

In a cruelly long time, with the maddest efforts, he 
managed to loosen them a little. Lie .sto(jd, panting in the 
darknes.s, with swollen arms, and throbbing hands. When 
his breath returned he crept further and further along the 
wall, feeling the damp stone, inch by inch, to make certain 
it had no jutting edges. Then he remembered the stairs 
down which they had thrust him, sought and found, and 
crouched down under them, to try and sever the thongs on 
the edge of a ste|). It was htird to manage, since hi.s wrist- 
hone,s kept grating against the stone. It seared his flesh; 
he could feel Ids hands wet. 

Still he persisted, and when at last a spare grey streak 
began to glimmer under the door, the cords were worn so 
tlfin that he could sever them. He had done it. His hands 
wcrefreel 

Yet now he could scarcely move a finger, since his arms 
were numb, and swollen to the shoulders. He tried to force 
the blood to flow back into them. 

Now he had a plan which .seemed good to him. If this 

247 



priest would not help his escape, and they left the man 
alone, even to shrive him, he would strike him down - one 
of the stools would serve his turn, his hands were still too 
weak for throtding - crack his skull with the stool, strip off 
his habit and get away in it. And then - run, run. Marie 
would take him in and hide him. It was worth trying. It 
was possible. 

Never in all his life before had Goldrnund awaited day¬ 
break so impatiently, longed for it, watched for it and, yet 
feared it, He watched, with a huntsman’s eye, the thin grey 
streak under the door as slowly, very slowly, it brightened. 
Then he went back to the table, and practised how he would 
sit, hunched up on the stool, in such a way that they should 
not see at once that his wrists were free again. 

Now that he had his hands death seemed unreal to him. 
He would.come out alive, if he shattered the whole world 
to do it. His body twitched with longing to be free. Who 
could tell -- help might come from outside. Agnes was only 
a woman, and not very powerful. She might be afraid: 
she might let him die for her own sake. But still, she loved 
him, and something, perhaps, she would attempt. Her tire¬ 
woman, Bertha, might already be creeping to the door, and 
was there not a squire she had said was faithful? And if 
none came to him with a message he had his own plan, ready 
to execute. Should it go awry he would fell his keepers with 
a stool ~ two, three, or as many as they sent. He had this 
advantage - that his eyes were used to the dark. Now, in the 
twilight, he could see every shape and mass around him, 
whereas the others would be purblind. 

He crouched behind the table, eagerly watching the spare 
increase of light under the door, forcing himself to plan out 
in advance each word he would say to the priest, since that 
at least must be attempted. The instant which he had 
dreaded an hour since, he longed for so that, now, he could 
scarcely wait for it. This strained alertness had grown un- 
248 


bearable. His strength, his quickness, his resolve, must 
gradually lose their edge if they kept him waiting. Surely 
this priest and gaoler would be here before the will to live 
had ebbed in him. 

At last the world outside began to rouse itself, and so the 
enemy was upon him. Steps clattered over the yard, a key 
was thrust into the lock; it turned, and each of these sounds, 
after the long quiet and dark, seemed like a thunderclap. 

Now the heavy door swung open slowly, on grating 
hinges. The priest came in to him alone, unescorted by any 
gaoler or serving-man, and carrying a sconce with double 
flames. Already something unforeseen by the prisoner. 

And how strange and moving to behold: this priest 
whose invisible hand closed the door behind him, wore the 
well-known habit of Mariabronn, the habit of his home, the 
cloister; the habit worn by Abbot Daniel, by Pater Anselm, 
by Pater Martin. The sight of it stirred him so that he had 
to turn away his eyes. This might be the promise of rescue. 
Yet perhaps there would be no other way but to kill him. 
He set his teeth. It would be hard to strike down this priest. 


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN } 

‘Praise be Jesus Christ,’ said the Pater, and set down his | 
sconce on the table. Goldmiind hung his head, and i 
mouthed a response. i 

The monk said nothing. He stood expectant, without a | 
word, till Goldmund, grown uneasy, raised curious eyes. 

The prisoner’s confusion increased, as he saw that this 
monk not only wore the habit of Mariabronn, but the abbot’s 
cross and ring along with it. Then he looked this abbot full 
in the face, a spare face, firm and clearly oudined, with the 
thinnest of lips; a face he knew. Goldmund, as though | 

enchanted, stared at this face, which seemed all formed of | 

will and intellect. Uncertainly he put his hand to the sconce, j 

raised the light, held it close to the stranger’s eyes. He saw, I 

and the flames were trembling as he set it back upon the i 

table. [ 

‘Narziss,’ he whispered, almost inaudibly. Everything I 

swirled before his eyes. 1 

‘Yes, Goldmund, I was Narziss once, but now it is long j 

since I laid aside that name. Have you forgotten that I took I 

the name of John when I was consecrated ? ’ f 

Goldmund was moved to the heart. For him the world had 
changed its aspect. The strain of the last hours suddenly 
loosened: he shook all over, and giddiness made his head an 
empty bladder, his belly heaved, hot tears scalded behind 
his eyes, sobs threatened to shake his whole body. To .sink 
weeping to his knees, as in a swoon -• everything within him 
longed for that. 

But out of the depths, which this sight of Narziss opened 
up in him, there arose a warning memory of his boyhood. 

250 


Once, as a boy, he had sobbed, and let emotion drown him, 
before this fair, grave face, these omniscient eyes. That he 
must never do again. Here like a ghost, at this most crucial 
hour of his whole life, Narziss had come, and it seemed he 
brought him his reprieve. Should he stand again, weeping 
before his friend, sink down at his feet in a swoon ? No! No! 
No! He must control himself, rein in his heart, and force 
his guts to obey him, sweep away the giddiness from his 
mind. No weakness now! He managed to answer, in a voice 
artfully controlled: 

‘You must let me call you Narziss still’ 

‘Call me that, 0 amice, But why not give me your hand?’ 

Again Goldmund forced his spirit to answer on a note of 
schoolboy mockery, just as he had often done in the old days: 

‘Forgive me, Narziss,’ he said, a litde coolly and wearily. 
‘I see they have turned you into an abbot. I am still 
nothing but a vagrant. And much as I would like a long talk 
with you, I fear we shall never be able to have it. For, listen, 
Narziss; I go to the gallows in half an hourl This I only 
tell you to make it clear.’ 

Narziss’ expression had not changed. This grain of boast¬ 
fulness and boy’s courage still in his friend, touched him, 
and yet amused him highly. Truly he had imagined a dif¬ 
ferent meeting, and yet this little comedy won his heart. 
Nothing that Goldmund could have said would have been 
a .surer way back to his love. 

‘As to the gallows,’ he said, as careless as Goldmund, 
‘make your mind easy on that. You are pardoned. I am 
commissioned to tell you this, and take you along with me. 
You must not stay here in the city. So there’s time enough 
to tell each other this and that. Well, now, will you give me 
your hand?’ 

They clasped hands and stood a long while, their hearts 
stirred deeply by this touch, though their words, for a litde 
longer, remained full of comedy and pretence. 

251 


‘Good then, Nar/iss - let us leave tins ignorninious re¬ 
treat. So 1 am to join you as a lollovvci'. Du Wf go back 
to Mariabronn? That^s good. ... hint how? On horse¬ 
back? Better .still. But tlien 1 .shall need a horjic to come 
with you,’ 

‘You shall have your hfrrst;, my fritaid, and within two 
hours we must .set out. Oh - hut yfjur h.'iiid.s. In jesirs’ 
name - all gashed and bleeding. Ah, Ooldinund, what have 
tliey been doing to you?’ 

‘Let be, Narziss. It wa.s I who wounded my own hands. 
I wa.s bound, and wanted to bi'eak free, and il wasn’t easy, I 
can tell you. Do you know it wa;; very vali.ant of you to 
coriae in to shrive rue, without au escort! ’ 

‘Valiant? Butwhy? I'here was no danger.’ 

‘Oh no no danger at all - excejit lliat 1 might cnick 
your .skull. That was wh.at 1 li.ad plannetl, yon ;iee. They 
told me I .sliould h.ave a [n'icst, and so I thought 1 wonhl 
.strike him down, and lake hi:; habit to esca|)e in. It wa.s u 
good plan.’ 

‘So you wanted to live, then ?’ 

‘As.surecily. 'riiotigli 1 never tlioiiglit they would send me 
Narziss to shrive my .soul.’ 

‘All the .same,’ Narzisfi hesitated, ‘it was an iiidy [ilan to 
have in mind. Would you in iriith li.ive struck down the 
priest who had come to shrive you for your de.illi?’ 

‘Not you, Narziss- naturally I would never have striKk 
you down. And pt;rhaj)s not any of yunr mtjnk.s, Ifut any 
other [rriest - oh yes, heliiwe me! ’ 

Suddenly hi,s voice grew sad. 

*lt would not have been tlie first man I had killed.’ 

They were silent. Both felt uneasy. 

‘As to all tliat,’ .said Narziss, in an even voice, ‘we shall 
have the time to talk of it. If y/ai lilw I will hear yonr 
confession. Or tell me of your life, if: you w'onkl ratlier, 1 
.shall be glad to hear. Let its go.’ 


‘One minute nnst, Narziss. I’ve remembered something. 
I named you “John” myself, once.’ 

‘I don’t understand.’ 

‘No, how .should you? It was many years since that I 
gave you the name of St John, and now you must bear it 
for ever. You see, I was once a carver and image-maker, 
and so I hope to be again. And the best statue I ever cut 
in those day.s was a young saint in wood, done in your like¬ 
ness, thougfi I called it St |ohn, and not Narziss. It is St 
John the Discijilc, under the rood.’ 

He rose, and went to the door. 

‘You’ve thought of me, then?’ a.skeclNarziss softly. 

And Goldrnund, in the sjime low voice: 

‘Oil, ye,s, Narziss - again and again.’ 

He gave the heavy door a shove, and the pale morning 
■ lighted tliern both. They said no more. Narziss led him on 
to his own guest-chamber. There a young monk was busy, 
packing their traps. Goldmimd was given a meal, and his 
wrists hound up for the time being. Very soon the horses 
were led out. 

As they mounted, Goldrnund said: 

‘I have one more wish. Let us take the way across the 
Fish-Market. There’s someone there I want to see.’ 

They all rode off. Goldrnund looked up at every window 
of the palace, to make sure that Agnes was not in one of 
them. But he did not get another siglit of her. They rode on, 
over the Fish-Market, Marie had been terrified for his safety. 
He t(ti)k leave of her, and of her parents, promised to be 
back .soon, and they rode away. She stood at the door look 
ing after him till all the riders were out of sight. Slowly she 
limped back into the house. 

They rode four abreast; Narziss, Goldrnund, the young 
monk, and an armed churl. ■ 

‘Can you still remember Bless, my pony, who had hi 
stall in the cloister?’Goldmimd asked. 






‘To be sure. You won’t find him now, though, and I 
know you never expected you would. It must be seven or 
eight years now, since we had to slaughter him.’ 

‘Ah, you remember that?’ 

‘Oh yes. I remember.’ 

Goldmund did not grieve for his pony’s death, but was 
glad indeed that Narziss should remember him so clearly ~ 
he who gave small thought to any animal, and certainly 
would never have known the name of any other horse in tlie 
cloister stall. This thought rejoiced him. 

‘You’ll laugh,’ he began, ‘that first I ask for news of 
my poor little pony. That was uncivil of me. Indeed, I 
have better things to ask you, and would know first of Abbot 
Daniel. But since you are the abbot now, he must be dead. 
And 1 do not want to ask of nothing but death. This is a 
bad time to speak of death to me, both from last night, and 
because of the plague, of which I saw all too much on the 
roads. But all’s one now, and we all die some day! Tell me 
when and how Abbot Daniel died. I honoured him greatly. 
And is Pater Martin alive? And Pater Anselm? I have had 
no news at all of any of you. But at least I rejoice that the 
plague has passed yoii by, although I never thought you 
could be dead. Always in my heart I knew that we should 
meet again. Yet beliefs can trick us, and this 1 know to my 
cost, since my master, Master Nicholas, the wood-carver, 
whom I never could think of as dead, and counted firmly on 
working with him again, had vanished for ever when I 
came back to him.’ 

‘All’s quickly told,’ said Narziss. ‘Abbot Daniel died so 
long as eight years since, without sickness or any pain. I am 
not his successor. I have only been abbot since last year. 
He was succeeded by Pater Martin, who governed the school, 
as you remember, and died a year ago, at close on seventy. 
And Pater Anselm is also dead He loved you, and would 
often speak of you. In his last years he could not so much as 
254 


walk any more, and to lie gave him great pain, since he died 
of the dropsy. Yes, and the plague has been with us, too. Let’s 
not talk of it! Have you any more to ask ? ’ 

‘Surely I have ” and much. About everything. How came 
you here, to the Bishop’s city, and the stattholder?’ 

‘That’s a long story and it would weary you. There is 
so much policy in it. The count is a favourite of the Emperor 
and, in certain matters, has full power from him, and at 
present there is much to set to rights between the Emperor 
and our order. The order gave me commission to treat with 
the count. My success was small. ’ 

He was silent, and Goldmund asked no more. Nor was he 
ever to learn how when last night, Narziss had begged for 
his life he had had to pay for it with concessions, or the surly 
count would never have granted it. 

They rode. Goldmund felt very weary, arid soon had pains 
to sit his horse. After a long silence Narziss asked him: 

‘Is it true they took you as a thief? The count would.have 
it you crept into the castle to steal gear from the inner 
rooms.’ 

Goldmund laughed: ‘Sure enough that was how it 
seemed. I am not a thief, but I had a meeting with his leraan. 
I am amazed he let me go so easily,’ 

‘It wasn’t so easy as all that’ 

They could not do the stage they had set themselves. 
Goldmund was too weary to ride further, and his hands 
refused to hold the bridle. That night they lodged in a vil¬ 
lage, where he was put to bed in a low fever, and so lay on 
there, all next day. Then he could ride again, and soon, 
when his hands were better, he enjoyed the feel of his horse. 
It was a long time now fince he had ridden one. He revived, 
and felt young and full of life, raced the groom for miles 
for a wager, and then, at times, assailed Narziss with a 
hundred impatient, eager questions, Narziss let him ask 
his fill. He had fallen under Goldmund’s spell again, and 


255 





loved this stream of doubts and demands, all made In the |. 
boundless trust of his own capacity to resolve them. I 

, ‘One thing I wanted to ask you, Narziss. Did you ever 
burn Jews?’ 

‘Burn Jews? Why should we? There are no Jews any- I 
where near Mariabronn.’ | 

‘Understand me, Narziss. I mean this. Can you imagine ; 
any instance in which you would give your consent to have | 
Jews slaughtered, or command it ? There have been so many i 
dukes and bishops, and burgomasters, and other such lords, r 
giving these orders.’ ‘ ; 

‘I myself would not give such an order. But it might well i 
be that I should have to stand by, and watch the cruelty.’ [ 
‘You wouldbearwithit, then?’ | 

‘Certainly, if I had not the power to prevent it. Did you j., 
see any Jews burn, Goldmund?’ I 

‘Oh yes -’ 

‘Well, and did you prevent it? No? So you see-’ i 

Goldmund told him the story of Rebeccca, and as he told, - 
grew fiery and full of grief. I' 

‘And so,’ he added angrily, ‘what a world is this, in [ 

which we must live. Is it not a sort of hell? It is horrible, ' 

and fills me with rage.’ ; i 

‘Certainly. Such is the world.’ . ! 

‘Well,’ cried Goldmund, ‘how often did you tell me once i 
that the world was divine, a great harmony of circles, so 
you said, in the centre of which the Creator sits on His |. 
throne, and that all which He has fashioned is good, and so | 

on, and so on. And you said all that stands written in | 

Aristotle and St Thomas! 1 am anxious to hear you un- j 
ravel such contradictions.’ | 

Narziss laughed. ■ , ' 

‘Your memory is admirable. And yet you have made i 

a few mistakes. I have always honoured the Creator as I 

perfect, but never His work. I have never denied the evil I 
256 ;.i 


in the world. That man is good, or our earthly life just, and 
full of harmony - that, my friend, is more than any sound 
thinker has ever said. More it stands clear in Holy Writ 
that all tlie strivings and dreams in our hearts are imperfect, 
and this is proved every day.’ 

‘Good. Now at last I see how you have learned to judge 
of it. So men are evil, you say, and our life on earth is full 
of meanness and horror: - that you admit, then. But some¬ 
where behind, hidden in your thoughts and books of pre¬ 
cepts, you discover a justice, and a perfection. They are there, 
and can be proved, but nobody uses them,’ 

‘You have managed to store up much gall against us theo¬ 
logians, 0 amice, But with all that you are not a thinker yet. 
You confuse it all, and there is still a little for you to learn. 
Why do you say we make no use of the idea of justice? We 
do that every day, and every hour of the day. I, for example, 
am an abbot, and have my cloister to govern, and in that 
cloister they are just as imperfect and full of faults as any 
in the world outside. Yet again and again, unceasingly, wc 
set the idea of justice against the original sin of our nature, 
strive to measure our imperfect lives by it, seek to arrest 
the evil, and keep ourselves in firm relationship with God.’ 

‘Ah, no, Narziss - it was not you I meant, I never said 
you were not a good abbot. But I think of Rebecca, and the 
burning Jews, and the death-holes, and the great death in all 
the houses and streets, when plague-corpses rotted and stank, 
and all the horror and desolation! I think of the children 
straying the roads, without kith or kin, or any to shelter 
them, or yard-dogs, famished on their chains... and when 
I see it all before my eyes again, it seems to me as if our 
mothers had born us into a world of fiends. It would be 
better if we had never been, and God never made this 
horrible earth, nor tlie Saviour hung uselessly on the cross 
fork.’ 

Narziss noddedgently; 


N.6.-13 


257 



‘You are right,’ he answered. ‘Speak all your heart, and 
tell me everything. But in one thing you are very wide 
of the mark. You mistake all these for your thoughts, but 
they arc your feelings - the feelings of a man stung to action 
by the cruelty of life. And never forget that other, very 
different feelings, may be set over against this despair. When 
you feel yourself at one with your horse, and so ride out 
through a pleasant country - or when, without knowing 
how it may end, you creep at night into a casde to pay your 
court to the count’s leman, the world seems a very different 
place to you, and not all the burning Jews and plague- 
stricken houses can hinder you from seeking your desire in 
it. Is that not true.?’ 

‘To be sure it is. Yet it is just because the world is so 
full of death that I must ever find new comfort for my heart, 
I find a desire, and so, for an hour, I forget death. But, none 
the less, death is always with me.’ 

‘You said that well. Good, then; you find yourself in a 
world of death and horror, and so, to escape them, you fly to 
lust. But lust soon fades; it dies and leaves you in the 
wilderness.’ 

‘Yes, so it is,’ 

‘And so it is for most other men, amice^ though few care to 
feel it so deeply, or say it so vividly as you do. And fewer 
still have any need in them to make themselves aware of 
what they feel. But tell me this: besides this desperate run¬ 
ning to and fro from horror to desire, and back again, this 
juggler’s sport with your love of life and fear of death - have 
you sought any other way to happiness ? ’ 

‘Gh yes, indeed. I tried to find my happiness as a caner, 
I told you how I had once been that. One day when I had 
been perhaps two years on the roads, I entered a cloister- 
church, and found there a Blessed Virgin in wood, who 
troubled my heart so much with her beauty, and held me so, 
that I sought out the Master who had carved her. I found 


him, and he was a famous guildsman. I became his appren¬ 
tice, and worked two years with him.’ 

‘Later you shall tell me more of that. But what comfort 
did your carving bring you ? What did it mean ? ’ 

‘It meant the conquest of all that perishes. I saw that 
out of this zanies’-tumble and death-dance, something can 
remain of our lives, and survive us - our images. Yet they, 
too, perish in the end. They are buried, or they rot, or are 
broken again. And yet their lives are longer than any human 
life, so that, behind the instant that passes, we have, in 
images, a quiet land of shrines and precious shapes. To 
work at these seemed good and comforting to me, since it is 
almost a fixing of time for ever.’ 

‘Your words delight me, Goldmund, and I hope you will 
carve many more of such fair images. My trust in your skill 
is great. In Mariabronn you must be our guest for a long 
while, and allow me to set you up a workshop there. It is 
years since our cloister had a craftsman. Yet I think that, 
by your definition, you have not exhausted all the wonders 
of art. I believe the truest images to have more in them than 
that something alive, and there for all to see, should be made 
permanent, and so rescued from death. I have seen many 
works of painters and carvers, many saints and madonnas, 
of which I do not believe that they are true copies of the 
shape of any single person, who lived once, and whose form 
and colonr were caught and preserved by the maker.’ 

‘You are right,’ cried Goldmund, ‘and I never should have 
thought you could know so well what a true craftsman can 
do. The pattern of any good image is no real, living form, 
or shape, although such shapes may have prompted the 
maker to it. Their true first pattern is not in flesh and 
blood, but in the mind. Such images have their home in the 
craftsman’s soul. And in me, too, Goldmund, there live such 
images, which one day I shall hope to fashion, and show 
you.’ 





‘I am very glad. But see, mice, how, without knowing 
it, you have strayed into the midst of philosophy, and given 
words to one of her secrets.* 

‘You should not mock me.’ 

‘And I do not. You have spoken of “first patterns” - 
of images without existence save in the soul of the carver, 
but which he transmutes into matter, making them visible. 
So that, long before such a carver’s shapes can be seen, and 
so obtain their formal reality, they are there already, as forms 
within his soul. And this same “first pattern” - this shape - 
is, to a hair, what old philosophers called “the idea”.’ 

‘That sounds true enough.’ 

‘Well, but once you speak of ideas, you have wandered 
into the realm of intellect, into our world of theologians and 
philosophers, and so you admit that, in all this confusion and 
pain of the battlefield - this endless, weary dance of death of 
our living and corporeal substance, there is a spirit which 
fashions for eternity. Listen, I have always perceived this 
spirit in you, ever since you first came to me as a boy. But 
yours are not philosopher’s thoughts, though they are that 
in you which has shown you your way out of the maze and 
sorrow of our senses, the resdess tides of despair and lust. 
Ah, Goldmund - it makes me very happy to have heard 
you speak as you did. I have been waiting for that since 
those old days, ever since the night when you left your 
teacher, and found the courage to be yourself, Now we have 
found each other again.’ 

And it seemed, in that instant, to Goldmund, as though 
his life had taken a meaning - he seemed to see it all, as if 
from above, with a clear view of its three divisions ; his de¬ 
pendence on Narziss; the time of his freedom and wander¬ 
ing; his return into harmony with himself, the ripening and 
fruitfulness of harvest. 

The vision faded. But now he had found a worthy rela¬ 
tionship with his friend, Narziss was no longer the master, 
260 


he the disciple. They were free and equal, and able to help 
each other. He could be this abbot’s guest without reluct¬ 
ance, since Narziss had seen in him his peer. As they can¬ 
tered together along the roads, he dreamed, with evergrow¬ 
ing desire and happiness, of the day when he would reveal 
himself to Narziss, setting forth the life of his spirit, in many 
shapes. Sometimes, however, there came misgivings. 

‘Narziss,’ he warned him, ‘I fear you reckon without 
your host. Do you know whom you have bidden to the 
cloister? I am no monk, and never shall be. I know the three 
great vows, and though I have nothing to say against pov¬ 
erty, chastity and obedience I abhor. While, as for fervour, 
there is scarcely a grain of it left in me. It is years since I 
prayed, or had myself shriven, to take the sacrament’ 

Narziss did not let this ruffle him; 

‘You seem to have turned into a heathen. But we have 
no fear of any such. You need not be so proud of your many 
sins. You have lived the common life of the world, and 
herded swine with all the other prodigals, till now you no 
longer know that mle, and good order, have any meaning. 
Certainly you would make a very bad monk. But I never 
asked you to join the order. All I ask is that you live with us 
as our guest, and let us set you up a workshop. And one 
thing more - do not forget that it was I who woke your 
senses, in your boyhood, and let them lead you forth into 
the world. You may be either a good man or a worthless, 
and I, after you, shall have to answer for it. I shall see what 
you are in tmth, since you will show it me in words, by your 
life, and in images. If I find that our house is not for you 
I shall be the first to ask you to leave us.’ 

Each time that Narziss said such things as this they filled 
■his friend with admiration. When he spoke thus, as an 
abbot, with this quiet certainty in his voice, his hint of 
mockery of worldlings and their life, Goldmund could per¬ 
ceive what his friend had made of himself. Here was a man 
261 



- a churchman, truly, with delicate, white hands and the I 
face of a cleric, but a man full of courage and resolution, 
a ruler, who answered for all. This man, Narziss, was no 
longer the young scholar he had known, no longer St John, 
the gentle, tender disciple. He must carve another statue 
of this new friend; this knight and leader demanded his 
hands to fashion him. How many shapes were awaiting 
him I Narziss, Abbot Daniel, Pater Anselm, Master Nich¬ 
olas, Rebecca, the gentle Agnes, so many he had hated or 
loved, living and dead. No, he did not want to be a monk. 

He wanted to carve, and yet it made him happy to think 
that his first home should be his workshop. 

They rode through the cool, late autumn weather, till at 
last, on a day whose morning branches hung, white with 
rime, over tlie roads, they came out onto rippling moorland, 
with wide domains of russet heath around them, where the 
lines of the long, far hills looked oddly familiar, yet seemed 
to hold a kind of threat; on, along the skirts of a high oak- 
copse, by a running stream, and past a barn the sight of 
which made Goldmund’s heart leap. Now, with joy and ^ 

sorrow, he knew again those very hills on which he had rid- j 

den with Lydia, saw the heath over which he had trudged [■ 

oil, outcast and sad, through the thin snowflakes. Then came | 

the alder-brake, the mill, the castle, and so, with aching • | 
delight, he saw the very window of the room in which, in his I ; 

fabulous youth, long ago, he had heard the knight tell tales i 

of pilgrimage, and helped fill up the gaps in his master’s i 

Latin. They rode on into the yard, since this was one of the i 

stages of their journey. Goldmund begged the abbot not j 

to name him here, but let him sup with the churls, at the ' | 
lower table. So it was done. There was no knight now, and ! 

no Lydia. A few old servants and huntsmen still remained, f 

and in the house, there ruled and lived with her husband, a [■ 

very beautiful, scornful mistress - Julia, sitting beside her f 

lord at the high table. She was still as lovely as he remem- I 

■ 262 . 


bered her, radiant, and a litde malicious. Neither she. nor 
her knight knew Goldmund. 

After supper, through the evening dusk, he stole outside 
into the garden, peeped over the hedge at already withered 
flower-beds, crept to the stable door, and peered through the 
chink at the horses. He slept with the grooms in their 
straw. Such a load of memories lay upon him that many 
times his sleep was troubled by it. How scattered and un¬ 
fruitful had been his life, rich in the colour of its images, 
yet shivered into so many fragments; so poor in worth, so 
poor in love. As they rode off again next morning he looked 
up uneasily at the windows, since perhaps he might see 
Julia at one of them. Thus, only a short while since, in the 
courtyard of the bishop’s palace, he had kept looking back 
over his shoulder, to make certain that Agnes had not shown 
herself. But she had not come, and neither did Julia come 
again! That had been his life, he thought, leave-taking, 
running away, being forgotten, being alone again with 
empty hands, and an icy heart. All* day the thought of it 
poisoned him; he could not speak, but sat there, frowning in 
the saddle. Narziss left him to his mood. 

Yet now, at last, they were near home and, a few days 
later, they had reached it. A little while before the cloister 
towers and roofs came into sight they rode over the same 
stony fallow-land where - how many ages ago - he had gone 
out plucking herbs for Pater Anselm; past the field where 
the gipsy, Lisa, had made a lover of him. They rode through 
the gates, and dismounted under the chestnut in the court. 
Goldmund gendy stroked its trunk. He bent to pick up a 
split and prickly husk, which lay on the earth, brown and 
withering. 



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 


At first Goldmund lived in a guest-cell within the enclosure. 
Then, on his own demand, they gave him a lodging, facing 
the smithy, on one of the many outbuildings which sur¬ 
rounded the great courtyard, wide as a market-place. 

This return held such potent memories that sometimes 
he would feel himself bewitched. These folk, both monks 
and laymen, were at work, and left him in peace. They 
lived their own strong, well-ordered life around him. But 
the trees in the courtyard knew him, the arched doors and 
pointed windows, the flagstones in every passage, the 
shrivelled rose trees in the cloister, the storks’ nests on re¬ 
fectory roof and granary. Every stick and stone held some 
gentle memory of his boyhood, and his love impelled him 
to seek out each, listen again for every cloister-sound, the 
Sunday bells, and bells to offices, the rushing of the dark 
millstream between its narrows walls, green with moss, the 
clatter of sandals, the evening jingle of keys, as the brother- 
porter went his rounds for the night. By the stone gutter 
into which, from the roof of the laymen’s refectory, rain¬ 
water dripped, just as of old, there sprouted still the same 
small herbs, crane’s-bill and plantain. The apple tree in the 
smith’s garden spread wide, gnarled branches, just as before. 
But more than any other sound or sight, it rejoiced him to 
hear the little tinkling school-bell and, in a play-hour, watch 
the cloister schoolboys come clattering down the steps into 
the yard. How young and fresh and foolish they all looked. 
Could he ever really have been so young, so coltish, so apple¬ 
cheeked, so callow? / 

And, within this cloister he knew so well, he found 



another, scarcely known to him. On the very first day he 
had been struck by it, and its beauty and significance in¬ 
creased, so that it took some time before it grew to be part 
of the other. This new cloister had no new features in it; 
each object stood exactly where he had known it as a boy, and 
where it had stood a hundred years before him. It was he 
who no longer saw with boy’s eyes. He could feel and 
admire the massing of these buildings, the strength of the 
vaultings in the church, the beauty of the old paintings, of 
the figures in wood and stone on the altars, and in every 
niche above the doors. And yet he had known them all 
before. Now he had eyes for their beauty, and for the 
beauty of the spirit that had made them. 

He would stand in the upper chapel before the old stone 
Mother of God, Even in his boyhood she had pleased him, 
and he had tried to copy her many times. But only now, 
with open eyes, did he grow aware that she was a master¬ 
piece, such a work as he could never surpass, even with his 
best and happiest craftsmanship. And there were many 
more such wonders in Mariabronn, though none stood alone 
as a happy accident, and all were born of the one spirit. Each 
had its own place under these vaultings, between these walls 
and ancient pillars, as though they formed its natural home. 

All that many centuries had built, chiselled, painted, 
thought, lived, taught here, sprang of one stem, was born of 
the one spirit, as related as are the branches of a tree. 

Goldmund felt small indeed in this ordered world, and 
never smaller than when he saw Narziss, the Abbot John, his 
oldest friend, sway and control this mighty unity. Whatever 
wide difference between persons marked off this learned, 
thin-lipped Abbot John from the gentle, simple, homely 
AbbotDaniel, each of them was sening the same whole, the 
same thought, the same rule of life; had brought it his body 
as an offering, taken from it his dignity and worth. It made 
them as alike as did their habit. 

265 



Here, ia the midst of his own cloister, Narziss grew to a 
giant in Goldmund’s eyes, although he managed still to 
treat him as his pleasant host and good companion. Soon 
he scarcely dared to call him Narziss. 

‘Listen, Abbot John,’ he said to him once, ‘I shall have 
to learn to call you that in the end I I must tell you I find it 
pleasant to live with you. You almost tempt me to make my 
general confession, and then, when my penance is done, 
beg you to take me in as your lay brother. But hear me - it 
would mean the end of our friendship. You would be the 
abbot, and I the lay brother. And to live for ever as I am, 
and watch your labours, and be nothing myself, and do 
nothing - that is more than I can bear any longer. I want 
to work, and show you what I really am, so that then you can 
judge for yourself if you think me worth saving from the 
gallows.’ 

‘I rejoice to hear it,’ said Narziss, more formally and 
precisely even than usual. ‘I will send for the smith and 
carpenter at once, and tell them they are to be at your orders. ■ 
Use anything you can find in the cloister, and whatever else 
you may need, make out a list for me, and I will have it 
fetched for you by carriers. Now you shall hear what I 
think of you and your purposes. You must give me a little 
time to tell you my mind. I am a scholar, and would strive 
to set forth the matter as I conceive it, and I have no other 
language but the philosopher’s. Will you hear me again, as 
patiently as you used?’ 

‘I will try to follow you, Narziss.’ 

‘Do you recollect how, even in our schooldays, I often 
told you you were a poet? In those days I considered you a 
poet, since both in what you wrote and liked best to read, 
there was always a certain sense of impatience with anything 
abstract and conceptual. Sounds were what you loved most 
in language, or any word which conveyed some sensible 
image; that is to say a word which could give a picture.’ 

266 


‘Forgive me,’ Goldmund interrupted, ‘but are not these 
concepts and abstractions which you say you prefer to 
images, pictures in their own way? Or do you really need 
to use words which can give no clear image of anything? 
How can you think, unless you picture something?’ 

‘Good that you should ask! Most certainly we can think 
without images. Thought and imagery have nothing at all 
to do with one another. Thinking is not done in pictures, but 
in concepts, and formulae. There where poetry ends begins 
philosophy. That was what we quarrelled over so often, 
long ago. For you the world was composed of pictures, for 
me of concepts. I always said we should never make a 
scholar of you, and I said, too, that this was not a lack in 
you, since you were master in the realm of images. Now 
listen, and I will make it all plain to you. If you, instead of 
escaping into the world, had remained on here as a scholar, 
the end might have been your own undoing. You would 
have turned into a mystic. And mystics, to put it plainly 
and rather bluntly, are those thinkers who cannot free their 
minds of images, and so not thinkers at all. They are secret 
poets, poets without verses, painters without a brush, musi¬ 
cians without any notes. There are many good and highly 
gifted mystics, but almost without exception they are un¬ 
happy. You might have been just such a one. But instead, 
God be praised, you are a craftsman; you have conquered 
your own world, in which you can be lord and creator, 
instead of having remained an imperfect thinker.’ 

‘I fear,’ said Goldmund, ‘I shall never have a right idea 
of your way of thinking without images.’ 

‘Oh yes, I will give it you, now at once. Listen; a thinker 
strives to find out the essence of the world by means of 
logic, and so to define it. He knows that our understand¬ 
ing, and logic, its instrument, are imperfect tools with which 
to work - just as any skilled craftsman knows very well that 

j no brush or chisel ever made, could give the perfect, shining 

; 267 




form of a saint or angel. Yet both these - the thinkers and 
craftsmen - strive to do it, each in his own way. That is all 
they can do, or dare to do. These are the highest, most 
significant human activities, since both are striving to fulfil 
themselves by means of the talents nature gave them. That is 
why I used so often to say to you: “Don’t try to ape ascetics 
and scholars, but be yourself; seek to fulfil yourself”.’ 

‘I can half understand what you mean. But what is this 
saying-r “fulfil yourself”?’ 

‘That is a philosopher’s concept, which I cannot express 
in any other words. For us, the disciples of Aristotle and 
St Thomas, the highest of all concepts is perfect being. 
Perfect being is God. All else that is, is only half. It is 
imperfect and for ever becoming, is mixed, and composed 
of possibilities. But God is whole. He is One, has no pos¬ 
sibilities, but is all completion and reality. Men are tran¬ 
sitory, we become, we are possibilities, and for us there is 
no perfection, no final being. But in all by which we pass 
on, from potentiality into action, from possibilitj? to fulfil¬ 
ment, we have our share in this true being of God. That is 
what I mean when I say, “to fulfil oneself”. Your own ex¬ 
perience must have taught you this, and you have carved 
many figures in your time. Now, when any such work seems 
to you really achieved, when you have set forth a human 
shape, freed from its inessentials, and held within its own 
clear and perfect form, you as a craftsman have “fulfilled” 
the image of that man.’ 

‘I undenstand you now.’ 

‘You see me, amice, here in a cloister, in an office which 
makes it relatively easy for such a nature as mine to fulfil 
itself. I live in a community and tradition which further my 
effort. A monastery is not a heaven; it is full of imper¬ 
fection and sin: yet none the less, for men of my kind, a 
rule well followed is far better than the life of the world. 
1 do not merely speak of manners and customs, and morality, 
268 


though, even in practice, abstract thought, which I, by my 
vocation, must use and teach, demands a certain protection 
from worldly tilings. So that, here in Mariabronn, I have 
had a far easier task to fulfil myself, than have you in the 
life outside. I much admire you for having found your way 
and made yourself a craftsman and an artist. Your life has 
been far harder than mine. ’ 

Goldmund flushed to hear this praise, and yet it rejoiced 
him. He interrupted, to change their theme. 

‘Though I understood most of what you were saying, 
there is one thing I cannot get into my head. This thing 
you have just called “abstract thought” must be a kind of 
thought with nothing in it; or else in words conveying 
nothing.’ 

‘Well, here’s an example to make it clear. Think of mathe¬ 
matics. What pictures do you get from numerals? Or from 
plus and minus signs? Or from an equation? None at 
all. When you solve an arithmetical or algebraic problem 
no image in the world will help you to do it. All that you 
do is to carry out a formal task, by means of a certain 
method which you have learned.’ 

‘That’s true, Narziss. When you write me down a row 
of figures or signs, I can work my way through without any 
images, and let myself be helped by plus and minus, by 
square roots, and brackets, and so forth. That is to say I 
could once! Today I’ve forgotten all about it, But Fcan’t 
see how such a formal task can be of use to any one at all 
except as a mental exercise for schoolboys, No doubt it’s 
very good to learn to reckon. But I should think it senseless 
for a man to sit all his life doing sums, and covering sheets of 
paper witli rows of figures.’ 

‘You are mistaken, Goldmund. You imagine such a busy 
reckoner to go on and on, solving new school-tasks, set by a 
schoolmaster. But he can set himself his own problems, 
they can grow in his mind to mighty forces. A thinker 

269 




must have worked over much real and imaginary space, 
mathematically, and planned it out, before he dares conWt 
the problem of space itself-’ 

‘Yes, but this problem of space, as a subject for thought, 
does not seem to me an object on v/hich any man should 
waste his labour and years. To me the word “space” means 
nothing, and ,not worth a thought in itself, unless I can 
picture a real space - let us say the space between the stars. 
Though certainly to see that, and measure it, would not be a 
bad way of spending time.’ 

Narziss interrupted, with a smile: 

‘What you really mean is that thought itself seems useless 
to you, but not the application of thought to the visible and 
practical world. I can answer you there. We shall never 
lack chances, nor yet the will, to apply our thinking. This 
thinker, Narziss, W instance, has used the results of his 
thought a hundred times over, on behalf of Goldmund, his 
friend, and on that of each of his monks, and does every 
hour. But how can a thinker apply anything, unless he has 
learned it, and practised it first? Poets and craftsmen con¬ 
tinually practise their eyes and fancy, and we praise their 
skill, even if they only use it to give us bad and unreal 
images. You cannot reject thought as such, and then only 
ask for its “practical uses”. The contradiction is clear. So 
leave me in peace to think my thoughts, and judge me when 
I show you their results, just as I will judge your craftsman¬ 
ship by your works. At present you are restiess and moody 
because there are still obstacles set between you and your 
craft. Clear them away, then! Find, or build yourself a 
workshop, and set to work. Many cares will resolve tliem- 
sclves with that.’ 


Goldmund asked nothing better. 

I He chose a shed beside the courtyard gate, at present empty 
-and good enough for a workshop. From the carpenter he 
ordered a drawing-table, and other furnishings, for which 


he set down the exactest measurements. He made out a list 
of all that the cloister carriers were to bring him, piece by 
piece, from the neighbouring cities - a long list. He picked 
out blocks, at the carpenter’s shop, or in the forest, of every 
kind of wood already cut, had these set aside, and piled one 
above the other, to dry, on the grass plot behind his shop, 
where, with his own hands, he built a roof over them. To the 
smith also he gave much work, whose son, a young and 
dreamy boy, he had charmed completely, and won over to 
him. Together, for half the day, they would stand in the 
forge, at anvil or whetstone, hammering out all the many 
curved or straight-bladed chiselling-knives, gimlets, and 
shaving-irons they needed to work on the wood. The 
smith’s son, Erich, a lad of twenty, became Goldmund’s 
friend, and helped him in everything. He was eager to 
leam, and at times when the sight of Narziss and his cloister 
filled Goldmund’s heart with shame for his idleness, he 
could always find his solace in Erich, who .shyly loved, and 
made a hero of him. The boy would beg for tales of the 
Bishop’s city and Master Nicholas, and these Goldmund 
told very gladly, until suddenly he would feel surprised to 
find himself sitting there, like an old man, full of tales of 
deeds and journeyings long ago, when his own life was only 
just beginning. 

No one, since none here had known him before, could 
perceive how these last months had aged and altered hirn, 
making him far older than his years. The hazards and needs 
of vagrants’ lives may already have begun to sap his strength, 
when he met the plague, with all its terrors, and e.xperknced 
' imprisonment by the count, with the horror of thax night 
in the castie cellar. These things had shaken him to the 
depths, and many signs of his suffering still remained; grey 
hairs in his yellow beard, thin lines in his face, nights when 
his sleep was troubled, with, at times, a certain weariness m 
his heart, a slackening-off of desire and curiosity, the dim 

271 




i and drab sensation of satiety. But youth came back in all his 

talks with Erich, in the hours when he could loiter in the 

smithy and carpenter’s shop. Then he was full of life, and 
beloved by them all, though at other times he would sit for 
an hour together, dreaming and smiling to himself, full of 
the strangest apathy and indifference. 

Hardest of all was to decide which figure he should first 

set out to carve. This, the beginning of his work, done to 

repay the cloister’s hospitality, must be no chance and idle 
product, quickly achieved to excite the curious, but must 
spring from the very heart and life of Mariabronn, and, like 
those ancient carvings in the church, be a worthy part of the 
very fabric. He would have liked best of all to carve a pulpit 

or an altar, but for neither was there need, nor any space. Yet 

he thought of something equally good. A high niche had 
been built into the wall of the Fathers’ refectory, in which, at 
meals, a younger brother stood, to read out the Lives of the 
Saints. This niche was without any ornament, and Gold- 
mund made up his mind to clothe the stairway up to the 
lectern, and the desk itself from which they read, in a 
wooden garment of decoration, with many figures, like 
those around a pulpit, some in half-relief, and others almost 
freed from the wood. He had told the abbot his plan, who 
praised and welcomed it. When at last the work could be 
begun, Christmas was passed, and the ground covered in 
snow. 

Goldmund’s life took on another shape. Now he might 
have left the cloister. None ever saw him now; no longer 
did he await tlie end of a lesson to watch the boys troop down 
into the court; he strayed no more in the woods, nor loitered 
idle in the cloister. His meals were eaten with the miller - 

P though not that miller he visited as a boy - none now could 
come into his workshop, save only his assistant, Erich, 
though sometimes, for days together, even he would never 
hear a word from him. 


272 


For the winding gallery round the lectern he had thouglit 
out the following plan: of the two halves into which the 
work should be divided, one was to set forth the world, the 
other the word of God. The lower half, the stairs up to 
the desk, growing out of a strong oak, and winding about it, 
should figure all creation, the works of nature, the simple 
lives of patriarchs and prophets. The upper, the parapet of 
the desk, would have figures of the Four Evangelists. To 
one of these he would give the face of Abbot Daniel; an¬ 
other should be his successor, the dead Pater Martin, and in 
the figure of Luke he would carve Master Nicholas, for all 
time. 

He had many stubborn obstacles to surmount, tar harder 
than he ever would have guessed. This grieved him, ljut 
with a pleasant grief. He wooed and enticed his work, as 
full of despair and of delight as though he had been courting 
a difficult woman, struggling with it, tenderly and firmly, as 
a fisherman angles a great pike, learning from every diffi¬ 
culty, and making his fingers still more delicate. Everything 
else was forgotten - the cloister, and ahnost even Narziss. 
Though the abbott inquired several times he managed to see 
nothing but drawings. 

But then, one day, in compensation, Goldmund surprised 
him with the demand to have himself shriven and assoiled.^ 

‘Till now,’ he said, ‘I could never bring myself to ask it 
of you. I felt small enough before you already. Now I am 
not so small. I have my work, and am not a cipher any 
more. After all, since I live in a cloister, I feel I ought to 
submit, like all the others.’ , 1 i j 

He would not wait, since now he felt that the hour had 
come for it. Moreover in his first weeks of meditation here, 
plunged as he had been in sudden memories, born of all 
diese sights of his youth - and later, too, as he told his tales 
to Erich - he had seen, in looking back over lus life, a certain 

shape and order in his days, 


m 






Narziss shrived him without ceremony. His confession 
lasted two whole hours. The abbot, with an unmoved face, 
heard all the adventures, griefs, and sins of his friend, asking 
many questions, but never breaking in on what he heard, 
listening, as unperturbed as ever, when Goldmund affirmed 
that he lacked all faith, admitting that he had ceased to be¬ 
lieve either in God’s justice or His mercy. He was struck by 
many things the penitent said to him; could see how deeply 
he had been shaken, how scarred he had been, how near at 
times to utter shipwreck. But then again he was forced to 
smile at the childlike innocence of this friend, whom he 
found so remorseful and afflicted, so full of despair at what 
he deemed his sacrilegious thoughts, though these were 
harmless enough, compared with some of those that haunted 
his confessor - to the dark chasms of doubt in Narziss’s 
mind. 

Goldmund was .surprised, disappointed even, that Narziss 
should take his sins so lightly, though this priest admonished 
and punished him without stint for his neglect of prayer and 
of the sacraments. He laid on him the penance to live chaste, 
and fast for a month, before he took the Host again. He 
must hear the first mass every morning, and each night say 
a Pater Noster, and canticle to Mary. 

Then he said: ‘I beg and adjure you not to take this 
penance lightly. I do not know if you can still remember the 
text of the mass. You should follow it word for word, letting 
its sense sink into your mind. The Pater, and some canticles 
I will give you, we can go through together today, and I 
will show you passages and words in them whose worth to 
you I would have you mark very clearly. We should never 
speak God’s words, or listen to them as we speak and listen 
to those of other men. If you find yourself saying them by 
rote (and this will happen very often to you) you must 
think of what I tell you now. Then you should start the 
prayer afresh, saying the words in such a guise that you feel 
274 


1 

I 

i 


I'-: ■ 

! ' 

them in your very heart. And now I will tell you how 
to do it* 

Whether by some fortunate chance or because the abbot’s 
knowledge of souls went deep enough to contrive such an 
issue, his time of penance and assoilment brought Goldmund 
many days of peace and harmony, days which rejoiced his 
j mind, in the midst of the cares and obstacles of his work, 

j He would find himself refreshed each morning and evening 

I by the light, yet precise and carefully chosen spiritual cxer- 

I cise; freed from the anxious striving of his days, his heart 

j and mind drawn back from the dangerous solitude of 

his craft, into kinship with a higher order - to a certainty 
which freed his mind, and led him as a child into God’s 
kingdom, 

Forced as he was to struggle in utter solitude with his 
j images, giving them his whole strength and his senses, this 
one hour’s gentle withdrawal led him back, again and again, 
into contentment. Often, as he worked, he would chafe with 
rage, or else be filled with mad delight: this quiet penance 
laid on him by his friend was like a plunge into deep, cold 
water, cleansing him of the pride of his desire, the other 
pride of his despair. But it did not always succeed. Often, 
after a day of restless work, he could find no calm, and no 
appea.sement. Several times he forgot these prayers alto¬ 
gether. Often, as he strove to plunge down again into their 
peace, he would find himself hindered and tormented by the 
thought that all prayers, in the end, are nothing but our 
childish striving to find a God who does not really exist, or, 
if He does, can never help us. He complained to his friend 

of it., I 

‘Keep to it still,’ said Narziss, ‘you have promised, and ’ 
you must stay it out. It is not for you to think whether God 
is listening to your prayers, or whether, indeed, a God exists 
at all, as you would imagine Him. Nor have you to fret or 
puzzle as to whether all this is so much cliild’s play. In 
275 




comparison with the God whom we petition all our human 
strivings arc those of children. You must forbid yourself 
utterly all such silly, childish thoughts during your exercise. 
Say your Pater Noster, and your canticle, and give yourself 
up to the words, filling yourself, and letting them penetrate, 
just as though you were singing or playing a lute. If you sang 
or played you would not let your mind go hunting after 
clever thoughts and speculations, but would strive to give 
out each tone and fingering as clearly and perfectly as you 
could. When we sing we don’t hinder ourselves with asking 
if our singing is really a waste of time. We sing, and that 
is all! That is how you must pray. ’ 

It succeeded again. Again his fretful, covetous self was 
merged into the wide-arched hierarchy of this cloister, the 
fair words poured down into his heart, and ascended 
through his body like so many stars. 

The abbot watched with deep delight how Goldmund, 
even after his time of penance, and now that he had taken 
God’s Body, still followed the daily exercise he had set, and 
/ j continued so for months and weeks together. 

H Meanwhile his work progressed. From the wide block, 
■ cut into spiral steps, there jutted forth a world of sprouting 
W shapes, plants, beasts, and men, entwined together, and in 

[ their midst stood Father Noah, among his vines with 

! clustering grapes on them -- a picture-book and song of 
living thanks from all God’s creatures in their beauty, 
each free after his own kind, yet led by nature and secret 
law. 


In all these months Erich alone might see the work, who 
was taken to do prentices’ labour on it, and so had now no 
other thought except to be a carver himself. But even he, on 


many days, was forbidden to enter the workshop, though on 
I others Goldmund was his friend, instmcting him, and let- 
Iting him try his hand, delighted at heart to have found a 
^ pupil and disciple. When the work was done, if it were a 
276 




i 


1 


I 


good one, he meant to beg Erich of his father, and take, him 
as his regular journeyman. 

At the figures of the Four Evangelists he could only work 
on his best days, when all was peace, and no pain or scruple 
teased his mind. The best among them, he felt, was the 
figure he had taken from Abbot Daniel, and he loved it 
deeply, since innocence and gentleness shone in the face. 
His image of Master Nicholas pleased him less, though 
Erich admired it most of all. It showed too much grief and 
conflict, seemed full of noble projects to create, yet desperate 
with the secret knowledge that all our works are as nought, 
tormented for its lost unity and innocence. 

When Abbot Daniel was quite ready he bade Erich sweep 
out the workshop. All the other figures he wound in cloths, 
leaving only this one full in the light. Then he went off to 
find Narziss, but, since the abbot had no time for him, 
waited in patience till the morning. Towards midday he 
led Narziss into the workshop. 

His friend stood and gazed. He took his time, examining 
the figure before him with all the care and attention scholars 
use. Goldmund waited behind him in silence, trying to 
quell the storm in his heart. 

‘Oh,’ he thought, ‘if one of us fails now it will be bad I 
If my work is not good, or else he cannot understand it, 
then all my labour will have no meaning. I should have 
waited after all.’ 

These minutes seemed like hours. Fie remembered the 
day when Master Nicholas had stood there holding his first 
drawing, and waited, pressing his damp and burning hands 
together. 

But when Narziss turned he knew he was safe. He could 
see how something had flowered in that spare, keen face; 
some blos,som of delight he had never seen in it .since their 
days together in his boyhood: a smile, almost shy and 
fearful, flickered about those eyes, all will and intellect, the 
277 





smile of an undying love, a shimmer, as though its pride and 
solitude had been in that instant broken up, and only the 
heart, with all its love, were visible, 

‘Goldmund,’ said Narziss, very sofdy, and, even now, 
weighing his words, ‘you will not ask me suddenly to become 
a critic of statues. That I am not, as well you know. I could 
tell you nothing about your art which would not sound like 
prattle in your ears. But let me say only this - at my first 
glance I knew this aposde for Abbot Daniel, not only as 
he was, but as all that he meant to us in those days; his 
dignity, his gentleness, his simplicity. And even as our own 
dead Abbot Daniel stood before our eyes and our young 
reverence, so do I see him here again, and with him all 
that was holy to us in those days, all that has made that time 
so unforgettable. You have paid my friendship most richly, 
Goldmund, since not only have you given me Abbot 
Daniel, but have shown me your whole self for the first time, 
now. I have seen you as you are. Let us say no more of 
it -1 dare not. Oh, Goldmund, that this hour should ever 
have come for us.’ 

The wide room was very still. Goldmund saw how deeply 
his friend rejoiced. Yet a kind of discomfort choked his 
answer. 

‘Yes,’ he said shortly, ‘I am glad of this. But now it is 
time you went to the refectory.’ 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 


This work kept Goldmund busy for two years, and from 
the second of these he had Erich all day as his assistant. In 
the wooden balustrade of his staircase he had planted 
another little Paradise, carving with delight an innocent 
wilderness of leafy trunks and tufted herbs, with birds on 
branches, and the heads and bodies of lurking beasts peep¬ 
ing out everywhere through the stems. In the midst of this 
peaceful, sprouting garden he set forth scenes from the lives 
of Patriarchs. There were few days now on which he felt 
it impossible to carve, when restlessness and weariness of 
mind kept him away from the workshop. When such fits 
were on him he would set Erich a task for the day, and stray 
out alone into the fields, at times on horseback, to taste a 
little vagrancy and freedom, seek out a peasant’s daughter 
in one of the villages, hunt, or lie for hours in the long 
grass, staring up at the vaultings of the forest, through a 
wilderness of fern and broom. Then he could work with 
fresh zest, carving with joy his plantation of herbs and trees, 
gently enticing men’s faces out of the wood, cutting out a 
mouth in a few firm strokes, the line of an eye, or a folded 
beard. Apart from Erich only Narziss had seen the work, 
and he often came over to the workshop, which at times 
seemed his favourite room in the cloister. 

Here he would sit and watch it all, amazed and delighted. 
Here at last, flowering in this work, were all the things his 
friend had kept so long in his child-like, defiant, suspicious 
heart. They blossomed here on every side - a creation, a 
little, sprouting world; a game perhaps, but certainly no 



worse a game than the one with grammar, logic, and theo- j 
logy. One day he said abstractedly: i 

‘I am learning a great deal from you, Goldmund. I begin | 

to see what it is that artists do. Till now it never seemed to f 

me that their art, in comparison with my thought and \ 

science, was a thing to be taken very seriously. I would think j 

more or less in this way: Since man, after all, is a dubious [ 

alloy of matter and spirit, and since his spirit can bring him | 

to the knowledge of eternity, whereas matter can only draw I 

him down into death, and fetter his soul to all that perishes, j 

he should strive away from the senses, to the spirit, and so I 

exalt his life, and give it a meaning. Only now do I begin to 
perceive how many paths lead us to knowledge, that study 
is not our only way to it, and perhaps not the best to fol¬ 
low. Certainly it is mine, and I must keep to it. But I sec you i 

by the opposite way, the way which leads through the | 

senses, reach as deep a knowledge as any that most thinkers j 

achieve, of the essence and secret of our being, and a far | 

more living mode of setting it forth.’ j 

‘Now you understand,’ said Goldmund, ‘why it is that j 
I cannot conceive of any thought without its image.’ j 

‘That I understood long ago. Thought is an eternal sim- j 
plilication - a seeing out, beyond the things of the eye; the ! 

attempt to construct a world of pure intelligence. But you | 

craftsmen take the most perishable of all things to your > 

hearts, and, in their very transcience and corruption, you | 

herald the meaning of the world. You never look beyond or j 

above it, you give yourselves up to it, and yet, by your very | 

devotion, you change it into the highest of all, till it seems ! 

the epitome of eternity. We thinkers strive to reach our God I 

by drawing the world away from before His face. You come | 

to Him, loving His creation, and fashioning it all over j 

again, Both these are imperfect, human works; yet, of the j 

two, art is the more innocent’ ( 

‘That I cannot tell you, Narziss. But it seems that you | 
280 \ 


tliinkers and theologians can succeed far better than I do in 
coming to grips with life, and holding despair at arm’s 
length. I have long since ceased to envy you your science, 
my friend, but I envy your calm, your peace, your even 
temper.’ 

‘There’s nothing to envy, Goldmund. There is no peace, 
in the sense in which you mean it. No doubt there is a peace, 
but not that peace which abides, and never forsakes us. On 
earth there is only that peace which we must conquer over 
and over again, from day to day, in ever fresh assaults and 
victories. You have never seen me assailed. You know noth¬ 
ing of my doubts at study, my torments in my cell at 
prayers. It is good that you do not. All you can see is that 
1 am less subject to moods than you, and so you think I 
must be at peace. But like every true life, it is all battle and 
sacrifice. Like your life also, 0 amice' 

‘We need not quarrel as to that. But neither do you see 
every struggle in my heart. I do not know if you under¬ 
stand what I feel when I think that soon my work will be 
finished. It will be carried away and set up, people will 
praise me for it, and then I shall go back to my empty work¬ 
shop, sad for all its imperfections, and the many things 
others can never see in it, with my heart as empty and deso¬ 
late a.s the place.’ 

‘That may be so,’ said Narziss, ‘and neither of us can 
ever quite understand the other. Yet all men of goodwill 
have this in common - that our works in the end put us to 
shame; that always we must begin them afresh, and our 
sacrifice be eternally renewed.’ 

A few weeks later Goldmund’s work was ready, and set 
up. All happened now just as it had happened years ago. 
The work became the possession of other men, was seen, 
judged, praised, and he was honoured for it, But his heart 
and workshop seemed deserted, nor could he tell if all his 
labour had been for anything of worth. On the day of its 
281 


N.G.-14 



unveiling he dined in the abbot’s refectory. There was a 
banquet, with the oldest wine in the house. Goldmund ate 
the delicate fish and the venison, but, more than by the rare 
old wine, he felt warmed and cheered by Narziss’ pleasure, 
who honoured him, and acclaimed his work. 

Another work, ordered and desired by the abbot, was 
already conceived, and the drawings made; an altar for 
the Lady Chapel at Neuzell, a cloister-church, served by a 
father from the monastery. For this altar he intended a 
Mother of God, whom he would use to rescue for ever one 
unforgettable memory of his youth, the knight’s shy, lovely 
daughter, Lydia. For the rest the work meant very litde to 
him, though it seemed a good opportunity to let Erich try 
his hand as journeyman. Should the boy succeed he would 
Lave a good workman to second him, one who could re¬ 
place and set him free for such works as alone lay near his 
heart. He went with Erich to assemble wood for the altar, 
and let him prepare it. Goldmund would often leave him 
alone to work, and go off for a day in the forest. He had be¬ 
gun to stray far from the cloister, and once, when he had 
been gone for several days, Erich told the abbot of his ab¬ 
sence, who began to fear that he had run away again for 
ever. He returned, worked for a week at the Lydia-madonna, 
and set out again. 

Fie was resdess. His life, since the great work was 
finished, had fallen into the old disorder. He no longer cared 
to go to early mass, and was deeply wearied and dissatisfied. 
Now he would often think of Master Nicholas, and wonder 
if he too would not soon have become very like him, busy, 
gruff, and skilful, and yet a slave, without youth in his heart. 
A recent experience set him thinking. One day in the woods 
he had met a little peasant, Francisca, who pleased him so 
that he did his best to charm her, using every device to make 
her his. The maid had listened to all his stories; she had 
laughed very happily at his jokes; but his love she refused, 
282 


and so for the first time he perceived that, to a young maid, 
he seemed an old man. He had not gone back to see her, 
and had not forgotten it. Francisca was right; he had 
changed, he himself could feel it, and truly not because of 
his few grey hairs, come too early, nor the little wrinkles 
about his eyes - it was something deeper, something in his 
mind and spirit. He felt himself old, and grown strangely 
akin to Master Nicholas, considered himself glumly in the 
looking-glass, and shrugged his shoulders at the sight. He 
had become safe and tame like other burghers, no hare or 
eagle now, but a house-dog. Whenever he wandered in the 
fields he would find himself seeking out old memories, his 
mind full of thoughts of past adventures rather than new 
happiness and freedom - as mistrustful and eager as a dog 
on a false scent. A day or two of frolic away from the cloister 
was enough to make him feel a truant, remembering that 
wood stood ready in his workshop - uneasily responsible 
for the altar, for Erich, his journeyman. He was no longer 
free, no longer young. 

And so he made a firm resolution. When this Lydia- 
madonna was finished he would take the roads for the third 
time. It was bad to live so long with men. Men were good 
enough to talk to, they could understand a craftsman’s 
work, and reason cleverly on it. But for all the rest, for 
tenderness and delight, play and gossiping, pleasure, with¬ 
out need for thought - for these there must be women and 
vagabondage, the roads with their changes and adventure, 
and none of it all could prosper near a monastery. Every¬ 
thing here, and all the surroundings of the cloister, had 
made his heart a little grey and serious, a little masculine 
and heavy, had infected him and got into his blood. 

The thought of another journey cheered him. He stuck 
hard to his work, to be sooner free of it, and, as Lydia’s 
shape emerged by degrees from the wood - as he carved the 
long folds of the gown, in straight lines down from her 
283 


delicate knees - a deep and poignant happiness shot through 
him, a melancholy devotion to her image, this firm, timid 
shape of a young maid, and all the memories it brought of 
her, of youth, first love, and first delight, He worked very 
slowly and carefully, feeling this shape at one with all the 
pleasure in his heart, with his joy and the gentlest of his 
memories. It was exquisite to shape the bend of her neck, 
her smiling, dolorous mouth, her lovely hands, the long 
fingers, and beautiful arched cups of the finger-nails. Erich, 
too, whenever he had time to look at it, would stare, in lov¬ 
ing bewilderment, at the figure. 

When they were nearly ready he showed his Lydia to the 
abbot. 

Narzisssaid: 


‘This is your fairest work, Goldmund. We have nothing 
in the cloister to equal it. I must tell you that in these last 
months I have often been troubled about your happiness. 
I have seen you so resdess and full of pain, and when you 
went off and stayed out longer than a day, I often feared you 
would never come back to us. Now you have made us this 
lovely figure. My friend, I am very proud and glad.’ 

‘Yes,’ answered Goldmund, ‘the figure has turned out a 
good one. But, Narziss, listen. To shape that figure it 
needed the whole of my youth, it needed all my vagrancy 
and loves, and every woman I ever knew. That is the source 
of my wofk, and soon the fountain will dry up, for my heart 
grows withered. I will finish this Maria, and then I would 
beg for a long holiday -1 cannot tell you how long. I must 
go out again, and find my youth, and all the things that 
made life dear to me. Can you understand? Well then, you 
know I am your guest, and have never taken payment for 
my work.’ 

‘I have offered it you often,’exclaimed Narziss, 

‘Yes, and now Twill take it. I will let them make me new 


clothes, and when they are ready I will come to you and ask 



you for a horse, to ride out again, and a few gold thalers 
for the journey. Say nothing against it, Narziss, and dont 
look sad! It is not that I have ever been unhappy here -1 
could never have found a better life it is something else. 
Will you do as I ask you?’ 

They said little more of this. Goldmund had them cut 
him a plain jerkin and riding-boots, and, as summer ap¬ 
proached, he finished his madonna, as though she were the 
last work he would do. As he set the careful finishing 
strokes to her hair and hands, and sorrowful face, it almost 
seemed as though he were delaying his own departure, as 
though he put it off again and again for one last delicate 
glimpse of Lydia’s beauty. Day after day went by, and still 
he had this or that to set to rights. Narziss, though this part¬ 
ing grieved him, would often smile at Goldmund’s passion, 
which seemed to hold him so fast to God’s own Mother. 

Then one day Goldmund surprised him by coming sud¬ 
denly in, to take his leave. He had made up his mind over¬ 
night. In his new jerkin, boots, and cap, he came to ask the 
abbot’s blessing. He had confessed, a while since, and re¬ 
ceived the Sacrament. This parting lay heavy on them both, 
though Goldmund pretended to more ruffling indifference 
than he felt. 

‘Shall I ever see you again ? ’ asked Narziss. 

‘Oh yes, surely you will ~ unless your good horse breaks 
my neck. Why there’d be none left to call you “Narziss, 
and trouble your mind. You’ll see me again, never fear. 
Don’t forget to keep an eye on Erich, though. And let no¬ 
body meddle with my new statue. She must stand in my 
chamber, as I told you, and never let the key out of your 
hand.’ 

‘Are you glad to set out?’ 

Goldmund screwed up his eyes. ^ 

‘Well, there’s no denying I liked the thought of it. But 
now that I start to ride away it isn’t so good as I hoped. 

285 



You’ll laugh at me, and say Fm a fool, but I don’t find it 
easy to leave you all; and yet this dependence on you 
misplear.es me. It feels like a sickness. Young, healthy 
folk aren’t like that. Master Nicholas was, though. Oh, why 
do we waste so many words. Bless me, Narziss. I want to 
go.’ 

He rode off. 

Narziss’ thoughts could never leave his friend; he feared 
for him, and yet longed for his return. Would tire golden 
bird ever fly back to his hand, the vagrant? God keep him, 
and bring him safe home. How many cares this yellow¬ 
haired boy had brought him, who complained all the while 
of getting old, and yet looked at him through such guileless 
eyes. How he feared for him now. I'his butterfly had gone 
his own zig-zag path, into danger perhap,s, to death or new 
imprisonment. He trembled, yet he rejoiced. Decj) down 
it filled him with deliglit that tlie forward child should have 
been so hard to curb, that he had such whims there was no 
holding him. 

Every day, at one hour or the other, the abbot’s thoughts 
returned to Goklmiind, in care and longing, love and grati¬ 
tude, at times in doubt, and .self-reproach. Ought he not, 
pta'haps, to have given more outward signs of hi.s love, 
shown Goldmund how little he wished him other than he 
wa,s, how both he and his carving had enriclied him? He 
had said so little, perhaps too little, of all this. WIk) could 
tell if he might not have managed to keep him. 

But Goldmund had not only enriched hif; life; he had 
made him poorer too, poorer and weaker, and certainly it 
was good to have kept that secret. This world in which he 
had his home, this cloister, his learning and hi.s office, the 
whole well-grounded structure of hi.s thought - had it not 
been shaken to its base, his faith in it almost destroyed, by 
his life with Goldmund? No doubt that, seen from a 
cloister, with the certainty of reason and morality, his ways 
286 


had been better, and far more just: his ordered days of rigid 
service, his sacrifice, for ever renewed, his perpetual striv¬ 
ings after clarity, and the greater justice it would bring: a 
far better life than any this vagabond could boast, this artist 
and lecher. 

But seen from above - as God might see it - were this 
patterned order and morality, this giving up of the world, 
and the joys of sense, this aloof withdrawal from blood and 
mire into prayer and philosophy, any better? Were men 
really made to live an ordered life, its virtues and duties set 
to the ringing of a bell? Was man created to study Aristotle 
and the Sumtna, to know Greek, extinguish his senses, fly 
the world? Flad not God made man with lusts and pride in 
him, with blood and darkness in his heart, with the freedom 
to sin, love and despair? Whenever Narziss thought of 
Goldmund such questions were foremost in his mind. 

Yes, and perhaps it was not merely simpler and more 
human to live a Goldmund-life in the world. Perhaps in the 
end it was more valiant, and greater in God’s sight, to breast 
the currents of reality, sin, and accept sin’s bitter conse- 
c|uence, instead of standing apart, with well-washed hands, 
living in sober, quiet security, planting a pretty garden of 
well-trained thoughts, and walking then, in stainless igno¬ 
rance, among them - the sheltered beds of a, little para¬ 
dise. It was harder perhaps, and needed a stouter heart to 
walk with broken shoes through forest-glades, to trudge the 
road.s, suffer rain and snow, want and drought, playing all 
the games of the senses, and paying one’s losses with much 
grief. 

Goldmund at least had shown him this - that a man born 
to noble life can plunge very deep indeed into the sea of 
blood and lust which men call living, spatter himself over 
with mire and gore, and yet never become deformed or 
dwarfish, never kill the God in his mind, and though he 
wander for years through the blackest darkness still carry, 



without risk of its extinction, the light which made him a 
creator, 

Narziss had gained deep insight into the chequered spirit 
of his friend, and neither his respect nor love was in any 
way diminished by what he saw. Ah, no - and since, under 
Goldmund’s sinful hands, he had watched the birth of all 
these marvels of still, yet living, form, each shape with its 
inner law and perfection, these reverend faces with deep- 
set eyes, through which the spirit shone in all its brightness, 
those praying or pardoning hands, all these bold or gentle, 
proud or holy images, he had known indeed how much of 
light and of God’s grace had illumined this lecherous 
wastrel’s heart. 

He had found it easy enough to seem wiser than Gold- 
mund in their talks, oppose to the passion of his friend the 
ordered clarity of his mind. But was not every gesture of 
these figures, each eye or mouth, each tendril, leaf, or folded 
garment, more real, more living, more irreplaceable than all 
that any thinker could ever furnish? Had not this vagrant, 
whose heart was so full of need and contradiction, set forth, 
for ever and for all men, the symbols of our human need, in 
shapes to which the longing and delight, the fears and hopes 
of countless humans would turn, to seek their comfort, 
strength and security? 

Smiling, yet full of grief, Narziss remembered all the 
times since their boyhood, when he had seemed to guide and 
admonish Goldmund. And Goldmund had heard his lessons 
gratefully, never once protesting or growing angry at his 
easy assumptions of leadership and control. Yet now these 
works, brought forth so quietly, from all the storm and pain 
of this harassed life - no words, no preachments, no ad¬ 
monishments, but life itself, raised up and dignified? How 
poor he seemed beside all these, with his science, his dia¬ 
lectics, his monk’s morality, 

Such were the thoughts that kept recurring. Just as, many 
288 


years ago, he had laid warning hands on Goldmund’s youth, 
shaking his purpose, and setting his life a new direction, 
so now his friend returned to trouble his spirit, forcing him 
to doubts and self-scrutinies. Goldmund was his equal. He 
had taken nothing from Narziss which he had not given 
again a hundred fold. 

This absent friend gave him much time to think in; weeks 
passed, and the chestnut tree had long since flowered, the 
clear, milky green of its blossom had long since hardened 
and grown dark brown. The storks on the gateway towers 
had long brought forth their young, and taught them to 
fly. The longer Goldmund tarried his return the more 
acutely Narziss perceived how much he was losing by his 
absence. He had several learned fathers as guests in the 
house; one skilled in Plato, a good grammarian, a couple of 
acute theologians. And among his monks there were one 
or two good and faithful souls, to whom their vocation 
meant something serious. But none of all these was his 
equal, there was none with whom he could truly measure 
his spirit. Goldmund had this irreplaceable gift, and now it 
was hard to do without it. He longed for his friend. 

Often he would go across to the workshop, to encourage 
the journeyman, Erich, who still worked on at the altar- 
piece, and who also pined to see his master again. Then he 
would unlock Goldmund’s bedchamber, in which stood the 
new Mother of God, carefully raise the cloths that enveloped 
her, and sit awhile looking at the image. He knew nothing ■ 
at all of her inspiration. Goldmund had never told him the 
story of Lydia. But he could feel it all, could see that the 
features of this girl had lived many years in his friend’s 
heart. Long ago, perhaps, he had seduced her, deceived 
her hope, and gone his way. But in his heart he had taken 
her shape, and shielded it, truer than the best of husbands, 
till in the end, perhaps after many years in which he had 
never had a sight of her, he had shaped this gracious, tender, 



young girl’s body, and in her face, her bearing, and her 
hands, set forth all the gentleness and wonder, delight and 
longing, of their love. 

The figures round the refectory-lectern had also much, 
for Narziss, of Goldmund’s history - the history of a lecher 
and a wastrel, a homeless, faithless, vagabond of the roads; 
yet all that he had left of it, there in the wood, was fair and 
true, and full of vivid love. How strange and secret life 
could be, how dark and muddy flowed the stream, how 
clear and beautiful what remained with us 1 

Narziss fought hard against himself. He won, and re¬ 
mained true to the way he had chosen, never abating a jot 
of his rigid service. But he suffered from the loss of his 
friend, and suffered too in the perception of how great a 
share, where all should have been given to God and his 
duty, that friend had taken in his heart. 



CHAPTER TWENTY 


The summer ended; poppies and cornflowers, corn- 
campion and starwort, withered and vanished, the frogs in 
the fishponds ceased to croak, the storks flew high, prepar¬ 
ing to depart. Then Goldmund came. 

It scared Erich to see him. True that at the first glance he 
knew him, and his heart leapt with joy at the sight. Yet it 
seemed another man who had come back, older by many 
years, a counterfeit Goldmund, ailing and spent, with a 
dusty, greyish, sagging face, although there was no pain in 
his eyes, but rather a smile, an old, good-natured, patient 
smile. He dragged his steps, and seemed exhausted. 

This strange, half-recognizable Goldmund took the young 
journeyman’s hand, and peered into his eyes. He made no 
great matter of his return, behaving as though he were come 
from the next room. He held Erich’s hand, but would say 
nothing, no greetings, no questions, no traveller’s tales. He 
only said: ‘I must sleep,’ and seemed too weary, almost, to 
move. He sent Erich away, and went into his bedroom, 
next the workshop. There he pulled off his cap, ^nd flung 
it down, kicked off his shoes, and lay on the bed. In the far, 
dark, corner of the room he could see his madonna, wound 
in cere cloths. He gave her a nod but did not go to lift her 
wrappings, or greet her. Instead he crept to the little win¬ 
dow, outside which stilT stood the uneasy Erich, and 
called: 

‘Erich, don’t tell any one I’m back. I’m very tired. 
There’s time till morning.’ 

He stretched himself out without undressing. Soon, hav- 
291 





ing found no sleep, he stood up again, and shuffled heavily 
to the wall, to peer into the little looking-glass that hung 
there. He stared very closely at the Goldmund who 
answered his gaze from the mirror’s round, a tired, withered 
old man, with vivid white streaks in his beard. It was a 
rather unkempt old fellow who stared back at him from 
the small dim circle, with a face not his, although he knew 
it, a stranger’s face, and one he could not feel to be really 
there, since it seemed to have so little to do with him. It re¬ 
minded him of many other faces; a little of Master Nicholas, 
a little of that old knight in the castle who had dressed him 
once as a brown page, a little of St James in the church - 
old, bearded St James, who looked so very ancient and grey 
in the shadow of his wide pilgrim’s hat, and yet a pleasant 
old man, with a good heart. 

He read his face very carefully, as though eager to learn 
all he could of this queer old fellow. Then he nodded, and 
knew it again as Goldmund. Yes, it was he; it tallied with 
his feeling of himself. A very weary and rather dull old 
man, back from a long journey, a quiet greybeard, and, 
though nothing much could ever be made of him, he bore 
him no grudge, he found him easy to live with. This ancient 
had something in his face which the other handsome Gold¬ 
mund had lacked. For all the exhaustion in these eyes there 
was a look in them of content - or of indifference. He 
chuckled gently, and watched the dim figure chuckle back. 
This was a fine old fellow to bring back home with him! 
His jaunt had left him spent and tattered indeed, with no 
horse now, and no travelling wallet, and no gold thalers in 
his purse. And, more than these, he had left his strength 
and youth, his trust in himself, the red in his cheeks, the 
light in his eyes. Nevertheless the image pleased him; this 
old weak fellow in the looking-glass was a better companion 
than the Goldmund he had lived with so long. He was 
feeble, pitiful; but more harmless far, and more content. It 
292 


would be easier to have a quiet life with him. He laughed 
and blinked with one of his wrinkled lids. Then he lay 
down on the bed, and fell asleep. 

Next day Narziss came to visit him as he sat, trying to 
draw a little, bent far down over the workshop table. The 
abbot stopped in the doorway: 

‘Thank God!’ he cried. ‘They have only just told me 
you were back. I am overjoyed. Since you did not ask for 
me I have come to you. Do I hinder your work?’ 

He came closer, Goldmund sat up from his drawing, and 
held out his hand. Though Erich had warned him in ad¬ 
vance, Narziss’ heart stood still at the sight of his friend. 
Goldmund smiled up at him: 

‘Greetings, Narziss. It’s a while now since we had a sight 
of each other. Forgive me for not having come over to you,’ 
Narziss looked him in the eyes. He too saw deeper than 
the spent, pitiful weariness in this face, saw that strangely 
tranquil look of contentment beneath, - an old man’s piti¬ 
ful resignation. Expert in his reading of human faces, he 
knew at once that this broken, strangc-looking Goldmund j 
was indeed no longer his, friend, come back to greet him 
that either his soul had detached itself from reality and wan- ;< 
dered along some far-off road of dreams, or already stood 
at the gate which leads out of life. 

‘Are you sick? ’ he asked him tenderly. 

‘Oh yes. Tara sick, too. I sickened in the first days of ray 
travels. But I didn’t want to have you laugh at me, and so 
you see I couldn’t turn back. You’d have laughed to see me 
again so soon, quietly pulling off my riding-boots. No -1 
couldn’t do that So on I went, and travelled a while here 
and there. I was ashamed to think my journey had gone so 
ill. I’d reckoned without my host, and so, you see, I felt a 
fool. Ah well, you’re wise, you can understand. Oh, forgive 
me - what was it you asked? I might be bewitched, for I 
keep forgetting everything they say to me. That business 

^93 



with my mother, Narziss! - you did that very well, you 
know. It hurt me badly at the time, but - 
His mutterings ended in a smile. 

‘We’ll care for you, Goldmund, you shall have every- | 

thing. But, oh - why didn’t you come back as soon as things | 

began to go ill with you? Truly we would never have | 
shamed you. You should have turned your horse.’ 

Goldmund laughed; | 

‘Oh, yes - now I know what it was! I didn’t trust myself 
simply to come back here. It would have put me to shame. 

But now I’ve come. I’m well again now.’ 

‘Have you had great pain?’ ^ | 

‘Pain ? Oh yes, I have enough pain. But listen - my pain j 
is a good one. It’s brought me to reason, and I’m not 
ashamed any more - even with you. That time you came to -; 
the prison to save my neck ... I had to set my teeth then, | 

Narziss, I was so ashamed to have you see me there. All’s i 

one now.’ j 

Narziss laid a hand on his arm. He was silent at once, and | 

closed his eyes with a smile. The abbot, with fear in his | 

heart, hurried away to summon the cloister-leech. Pater | 

Anton, and have him examine the sick man. When they ' | 
came back Goldmund sat asleep at his drawing-table. They 
put him to bed. The leech remained with him. 

He found him hopelessly sick. He was shifted into one 
of the cloister wards. Erich became his keeper, day and 
night. [ 

No one ever learned the whole story of Goldmund’s last i 

adventure on the roads. Some he related, and much he left 
to be guessed. Often, as he lay in a half-swoon, his fever 
rose and his mind wandered. At times he was clear in his 
speech, and then, each time, the would send for Narziss, 
who set great store by these last talks. 

Some fragments of Goldraund’s story and his thoughts 
were set down by Narziss, other? by Erich. 

294 


‘When did my pains begin? That was near the beginning 
of my journey. I rode through a wood, and the nag stum¬ 
bled and threw me, so that I fell in a stream, and lay the 
whole night long in cold water. Inside here, where my ribs 
broke, I’ve been feeling the pain ever since. And I wasn’t so 
% from here when it happened, so I couldn’t let it turn me 
back. I was like a silly child, that fears to look foolish. So 
on I rode, and then, when I couldn’t ride because of the 
pain, I sold ray pony, and lay a long while in a hospice. 
Now I’m back for good, Narziss: it’s all over with riding. 
It’s all over with wandering the roads, all over with dancing 
and women. Oh, if it weren’t. I’d have stayed away a good 
while longer, years longer. But when I saw that, out there, 
there was no more pleasure for me, I thought: “Before I 
have to go underground I’ll draw a little, and carve a couple 
of figures.” A man must have some kind of pleasure.’ 

Then Narziss answered him: 

‘It rejoices me to have you back with me. I lacked you 
so, and thought of you every day. And often I was afraid 
you’d never come back.’ 

Goldmund shook his head: 

‘Ah, well, you wouldn’t have lost much.’ 

Narziss, a fire of love and grief in his heart, bent slowly 
down over his friend, and did what he had never done till 
now, in all the years of their long friendship: he kissed 
Goldmund’s forehead, and his hair. Amazed at first, and 
then enthralled, Goldmund took count of what he had 
done. 

‘Goldmund,’ the abbot whispered, ‘forgive me that I 
could never say it before. I ought to have said it that day in 
the Bishop’s city, when I came to free you from prison; or 
here, when you showed me your first statue, or at any 
other time when I might. Let me say it now, and tell you 
how dearly I love you, how much your life has always 
meant to me, how rich you have made me. It will mean 
: 295 



very little to you. You are used to love, for you it is nothing 
out of the commonj many women have cherished you in 
their arms. For me it is different. I have missed the best, 
and my life has been poor in love. Our Abbot Daniel told 
me that I was proud, and it seems he was right in what he 
said. Not that I am unjust with men. I strive very hard to 
be just and patient with them. But I have never loved them. 

Of two learned monks in the cloister, the one with the more 
learning was the dearer to me. I have never loved a bad 
scholar in spite of his weakness. Yet if now, with all this, 

I know what love means, that is your doing, Goldmund. You 
I have loved, and you alone, of all humanity. You can never 
fathom what that means to me. It has meant the fountain 
in the desert, the one flowering tree in the wilderness, I have 
you alone to thank that my heart has not dried up and 
perished, that something in me can still be touched by 
grace.’ 

Goldmund smiled, happily but uneasily. He said, in the 
low, quiet voice of his lucid hours: 

‘After you set me free, as we rode home together, I 
asked you for news of Bless, my pony, and you told me his 
fate. Then I saw how you, who scarcely knew of any other 
horse in the cloister, have been keeping your eye on my 
little Bless. I was very glad, since I understood that you did 5 
it for my sake. Now I see that I was really as I thought, and 
indeed I know that you love me. I have always loved you, 

Narziss. Half my life has been a striving to gain your love. 

I knew you had always cherished me, but I never hoped 
you would say it - you proud one! You say it now, when 
I have nothing left but you, no life or freedom in the world, 
and women have turned their backs on me. I accept your 
love, and Ithank you for it.’ 

,, The Lydia madonna watched them from the corner of the 
room. ,i 

‘Do you still think of death?’asked Narziss. 

296 


‘Oh, yes, I think of death. And I think of how my life 
has shaped itself. When I was a boy, and you a scholar 
still, I wanted to be as wise a man as you are. You showed 
me how little I was fitted for it. Then I took the other side 
of life, and followed my senses, and women made it easy 
enough to find joy in it, they were all so willing, and greedy. 
But I don’t want to seem to despise them, or speak any ill of 
lechery. I was very happy in the flesh, and I had the hap¬ 
piness of knowing that the flesh can sometimes be the spirit. 
That is how craftsmen are made. But now the flames are 
all put out; I have lost the joy of beasts, and the longing 
for it. Today I should still not have it, even if women longed 
for me again. Nor do I care to carve more figures. I have' 
done enough. What difference does it make how many 
figures a craftsman leaves? So it is time to die. I am willing 
enough. I am even curious for it.’ 

‘Why curious?’asked Narziss. 

‘Well, I suppose you think me a fool - and yet I’m 
curious to die, Not for eternal life, Narziss. I think very 
little of that, and to put it plainly, I don’t believe in it any 
more. There is no eternal life. A withered tree is dead for 
ever; a frozen bird can never stir its wings again. Why 
should a man be a better corpse? Folk may go on thinking 
for a while of him, but, once he’s gone, that doesn’t last so 
very long. No, I’m curious to die because it’s still my belief, 
or my dream, that I’m on the way back to my mother; 
because I hope my death will be a great happiness - as great 
as I had 'of my first woman. I can never rid myself of the 
thought that, instead of Death with his sickle, it will be my 
mother who takes me into herself again, and leads me back 
into nothingness and innocence.’ 

At one of his last visits, when Goldmund had not spoken 
for several days, Narziss found him awake, and eager to 
talk. 

‘Pater Anton says you must be in very great pain. How 
297 



do you manage to bear it so quietly, Goldmund? I think 
you have made your peace at last.’ 

‘Peace with God, you mean.’’ No, I have not found that. 
I want no peace with God. He made the world too ill, we 
need not esteem it, and He will not care much that I praise 
or blame Him. He bungled the world! But you’re right 
when you say I have made peace with the pains in my ribs. 
Once I found it hard to bear pain, and although I used to 
think it easy to die, I was wrong. That night when dying 
seemed likely, in Count Heinrich’s prison, I saw that. I 
couldn’t die, and that was all about it! I was far too strong 
and wild to die then: they would have had to kill every 
limb in me twice over. All that’s changed now.’ 

It wearied him to speak and his voice grew feebler. Nar- 
ziss implored him to spare himself. 

‘No,’ he said, ‘I want you to hear me. Once I should have 
been ashamed to tell it you. You’ll mock me even now - 
but listen. That day when I straddled my horse and left you, 
it was not for any adventure I happened to find. I had heard 
a rumour that Count Heinrich was back in these parts again, 
and his leman with him. Mistress Agnes. Well now, all that 
means nothing to you, and today nothing to me either. But 
when I heard it, it fired me so that I could think of nothing 

■ else but Agnes. She was the loveliest I’d ever lain with, and 

■ so I longed for another sight of her. I wanted to be happy 
f with her again. So I rode, and in a week I found her. She 

was beautiful still, and I managed to speak to her, and show 
myself. But think, Narziss - she wouldn’t look at me. I was 
too old, she said, I was not fair or young or lively enough 
for her. She promised herself no joy with me now. So then 
my journey was really over. Yet still I rode on. You see I 
couldn’t come back to you to be shamed. But even then, as 
I rode, my strength, and youth and cunning must all have 
forsaken me, for I fell down a gulley with my horse, into a 
stream, and broke my ribs, and I lay all night in the water. 

298 


!: 

!, 

!' 

t 

t: 

[: 

1 

l! 


j- 

i 

I 

t 


Those were the first sharp pains I had ever known. In the 
very instant after 1 tumbled I could feel something break in 
my chest, and yet the breaking seemed a pleasure to me, I 
was glad. I felt it with delight. And so I lay there in the 
water, and knew that I should have to die. I had nothing 
against it now. Death didn’t seem so bad as it had in that 
prison. I felt those same sharp pains under my ribs that I’ve 
had so often ever since, and they brought me a dream, or a 
vision - just as you like. At first the pain seemed like a fire, 
and I lay there, shouting, and fighting it off, till suddenly I 
heard a voice, laughing at me ~ it was a voice I used to hear 
when I was a boy. It was my mother’s voice, a soft, deep, 
woman’s voice, full of love and lechery. It was then I knew 
that it was my mother. She was with me, holding me in, her 
lap, and she had made a hole in my chest, and set her fingers 
deep between my ribs, to loosen my heart, and draw it out of 
me. When I knew that, it didn’t .seem like pain any more. 
Even now, when these pains come back, they are not pains 
- not enemies. They arc my mother’s fingers, drawing my 
heart out. She’s very busy at it. Sometimes she presses down 
and moans, as though she were in an agony of love. Some¬ 
times she laughs and croons over me. Often she is up in the 
sky, and I see her face between the clouds as wide as a cloud, 
hovering up there, and smiling sadly at me. Her sad smile 
draws at my heart, and plucks it’ 

He spoke of her again and ag.ain, 

‘Do you know,’ he asked on one of the last days, ‘how , 
far I had forgotten my mother until you raised her up, and 
gave her back to me? Even that was a sharp pain. It was us 
though bea.sts’ heads were gnawing my entrails. Then we 
were still young, Narziss ~ fine boys, both of us, in those 
days. But even then my mother had called me back, I had 
to follow. And she was everywhere, She was Lisa the 
gipsy, and the sorrowful madonna of Master Nicholas. She 
was life and wantonne.ss, and fear and hunger, and love. 

299 ■ 







Now she is death, and she has her fingers in my breast/ 

‘Don’t say so much, my friend,’ begged Narziss, ‘wait till 
morning.’ 

Goldmund smiled up into his eyes, with the new smile he 
had brought home from his travels, the smile which seemed 
so frail and old, uncertain, at times, and feeble-witted, and 
then again pure goodness and pure wisdom. 

‘My dear,’ he whispered, ‘I can’t wait till morning. I must 
take my leave, and tell you everything in my leave-taking. 
Hear me a few minutes longer. I wanted to tell you of my 
mother, and how she keeps her fingers round my heart. For 
years I longed to carve my mother’s statue, it seemed the 
most splendid of ray dreams. That would have been the best 
of all my works, since always I had her in my mind, in a 
shape full love and secrecy. Even a short while ago I should 
have thought it unbearable to die without having carved 
my mother’s image. My life would have seemed so useless. 
But now, see how well she contrives it. Instead of my hands 
moulding her shape, it is she who moulds me, and informs 
me. She has her fingers round my heart, and loosens it, and 
makes me empty. She has led me to death, and ray dream 
dies with me - my statue of Eve, in wood, the Mother of 
all men. I can see it still, and would carve it, if I had any 
strength left in my hands. But she will not have it so. She 
will never have me disclose her secret. She will kill me 
rather. And yet I am glad to die, she makes it so easy for 
me.’ 

Narziss heard these last words in agony. To catch their 
sense he had to bend down close over Goldmund’s face. 
Many he could only half hear; many he heard, and yet 
their meaning remained obscure to him. Now the sick man 
opened his eyes again. Their eyes took leave. He whispered, 
with a little gesture, as though he were striving to shake 
his head; 

‘But how will you ever die, Narziss? You know no 

'■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ 


mother. How can we love without a mother? Without a 
mother, we cannot die.’ 

The rest of what he muttered was unintelligible. For the 
two last days and nights beside his bed, Narziss watched 
the light die out of his face. Goldmund’s last words still 
seared his heart like a flame. 


1 


I 

i 

i 


1 


MORE ABOUT PENGUINS 


Penguinews, which appears every month, contains 
details of all the new books issued by Penguins as 
they are published. From time to time it is supple¬ 
mented by Penguins in Print, which is a complete 
list of all available books published by Penguins. 
(There are more than five thousand of these.) 

A specimen copy of Penguinews wili be sent to 
you free on request, For a year’s issues (including 
the complete lists) please send 5op if you live in 
the British Isles or 75p if you live elsewhere. Just 
write to Dept EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Harrnonds- 
worth, Middlesex, enclosing a cheque or postal 
order and your name will be added to the mailing 
list. 


Note: Penguinews and Penguins in Print are not 
available in the U.S.A. or Canada 






Hermann Hesse 

STEPPENWOLF* 

Hermann Flesse’s poetical novel, Steppenwolf^ was 
written some twenty years before he won the Nobel 
Prize for Literature in 1946. This Faust-like and 
magical story of the humanization of a middle-aged 
misanthrope was described in the New Yor}( Times as 
‘a savage indictment of bourgeois society. But, as the 
author notes in this edition, Sieppenwolf is a book 
which has been violently misunderstood. This self- 
portrait of a man who felt himself to be half-human 
and half-wolf can also be seen as a plea for rigorous 
self-examination and an indictment of intellectual 
hypocrisy. 

THE GLASS BEAD GAME 

The Glass Bead Game is an ultra-aesthetic game which 
is played by the scholars, creamed off in childhood and 
nurtured in elite schools, in the kingdom of Castilia. 

The Master of the Glass Bead Game, Joseph Knecht, 
holds the most exalted office in Castilia. He personifies 
the detachment, serenity, and aesthetic vision which 
rewards a life dedicated to perfection of the intellect. 

But can, indeed, should man live isolated from 
hunger, family, children, women, in a perfect world 
where passions are tamed by meditation, where aca¬ 
demic discipline and order are paramount? 

This is Hermann Hesse’s great novel. It is a major 
contribution to contemporary philosophic literature and 
Q;-4ias a.powerful vision of universality, the inner unity 
1)f'm^n4 cultural-ideak^ and his search for personal 
perfection, and social'respohsibility|''' 







