PETER CAMENZIND



Books by Hermann Hesse

POEMS
PETER CAMENZIND
BENEATH THE WHEEL
GERTRUDE
ROSSHALDE
KNULP
DEMIAN
KLINGSOR’S LAST SUMMER
SIDDHARTHA
STEPPENWOLF
NARCISSUS AND GOLDMUND
THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
THE GLASS BEAD GAME

IF THE WAR GOES ON .. .



Peter Camenzind

HERMANN HESSE

TRANSLATED BY MICHAEL ROLOFF

a
=P

Farrar, Straus and Giroux

NEW YORK



Copyright © 1969 by Farrar, Straus and Giroux, Inc.
Sixth printing, 1972
All rights reserved

Translated from the German Peter Camenzind
copyright 1953 by Hermann Hesse, Montagnola

Library of Congress catalog card number: 74—872193

Printed in the United States of America
DESIGN BY HERB JOHNSON



PETER CAMENZIND





Chapter One

IN THE BEGINNING was the myth. God, in his search
for self-expression, invested the souls of Hindus,
Greeks, and Germans with poetic shapes and continues
to invest each child’s soul with poetry every day.

As a child I knew no names for the lake, mountains,
and brooks where I grew up. My eyes beheld the broad,
smooth, blue-green lake lying in the sun, glistening
with tiny lights and wreathed by precipitous moun-
tains whose highest crevices were filled with glazed
snow and thin waterfalls, and at whose feet there
sloped luminous meadows with orchards and huts and
gray Alpine cattle. And on my poor little soul, still
blank and calm and full of expectancy, the lake and
mountain spirits etched their proud deeds. Rigid cliffs
and scarred precipices spoke, in tones of awe and de-
fiance, of the age that had given them birth. They spoke
of ancient days when the earth heaved and tossed and,
in the moaning agony of birth, thrust mountain peaks
and crests from its tortured womb. Rock masses surged
upward, screaming and cracking until, aiming into
nowhere, they toppled. Twin mountains wrestled des-
perately for space until one rose triumphant, pushing

(1



PETER CAMENZIND
his brother aside and smashing him. Even today you
can find broken-off crags, toppled or split, clinging
precariously to the edge of a gorge. During each thaw,
torrents sweep down blocks of rock the size of houses,
shattering them like glass or implanting them in the
soft meadows.

These mountains proclaim a message that is easy
to understand when you have seen their steep walls
and layers upon layers of rock, twisted, cracked, filled
with gaping wounds. “We have suffered most brutally,”
they announce, “and we are suffering still.” But they
say it proudly, sternly, and with clenched teeth, like
ancient, indomitable warriors.

Yes, warriors. I saw them do battle with lake and
storm in the harrowing nights of early spring, when the
angry Féhn raged about their hoary peaks and the
torrents tore raw pieces from their flanks. They stood
there at night—breathless and unyielding, their roots
stubbornly straddling the ground, exposing cleft,
weather-beaten walls and crags to the storm, gathering
their strength as they crowded together defiantly. With
each fresh wound they received, I heard their dread-
ful roar of rage and fear; their terrible moans re-
sounded through the remotest valleys, broken and
angry.

And I beheld meadows and slopes and earth-filled
crevices covered with grass, flowers, ferns, and mosses
that bore odd and ominous old provincial names. These

2)



CHAPTER ONE

were the children and grandchildren of the mountains
and led colorful, harmless lives. I touched and exam-
ined them, smelled their perfumes and learned their
names, It was the sight of the trees, however, that
affected me most deeply. I saw each tree leading a life
of its own, formed in its own particular shape, casting
its own individual shadow. Being recluses and warriors,
they seemed to have greater kinship with the moun-
tains, for each tree—especially those in the upper
reaches—had to struggle tenaciously against wind,
weather, and rock to survive and grow. Each had to
bear its own burden and cling desperately, thereby
acquiring its own shape and wounds. There were
Scotch pines with branches extending only on one side,
and some whose red trunks crawled snakelike around
protruding rocks so that trees and rocks pressed and
clung together in a tight embrace, preserving each
other. These trees gazed at me like warriors and in-
spired respect and awe in my heart.

Our men and women resembled these trees. They
were hard, stern, and close-lipped—the best of them
the most so. Thus I learned to look on men as trees and
rocks, and to honor and love them as I did the quiet
pines.

Nimikon, our hamlet, is situated on a triangular
slope hemmed in on two sides by protrusions of rock,
on the other by the lake. One path leads to the nearby

(3



PETER CAMENZIND

monastery, the second to a neighboring village four and
a half hours away by foot. Other villages bordering the
lake can be reached only by boat. Our cottages, built of
timber frame in the old style, are of no discernible age.
A new cottage is rarely built; old buildings are repaired
piecemeal, as required—one year the floor, the next a
section of the roof. Many half beams and boards, once
part of the living-room wall, and still too good to be
used as firewood, come in handy when the stable or
barn needs repair or the front door a new crosspiece.
The people who live in these cottages undergo similar
transformations: each of them plays his part as long as
he can, then withdraws reluctantly into the circle of
extreme old age, finally sinking into oblivion—not that
much fuss is made about it. If you returned after many
years’ absence, you would find everything unchanged—
a few old roofs renewed and a few new ones grown old.
The old men you knew would have disappeared, to be
sure, but only to be replaced by other old men who
inhabit the same cottages, bear the same names, watch
over the same dark-haired brood of children whose
faces and gestures are scarcely distinguishable from
those they have succeeded.

What our community lacked was a frequent infusion
of fresh blood and life. Almost all the inhabitants, a
passably vigorous breed, are the closest of cousins; at
least three-quarters of them are called Camenzind. This

4)



CHAPTER ONE

name fills the pages of the church register and can be
found on most of the crosses in the graveyard. It is
crudely engraved or painted in loud colors on houses,
wagoner’s carts, stable buckets, and lake boats. My
father’s house bears the following painted legend: This
house hath been built by Jost and Francisca Camen-
zind, referring not to my father but to his predecessor,
my great-grandfather. When I die, even if childless, I
can be sure that another Camenzind will settle in the
old house, provided it is still standing and has a roof.
Despite this surface uniformity, our small hamlet
had in it good people and bad, eminent and lowly,
powerful and impotent. Side by side with a number of
clever ones, there flourished an amusing handful of
fools—not counting the village idiots, that is. Here, as
elsewhere, the large world was represented in small,
and since the mighty and the lowly, the sly and the
foolish were inextricably related and intermarried, it
was no surprise to find overweening pride and narrow-
minded silliness jostling each other under the same
roof—our life had sufficient breadth and scope for the
entire range of human life. Yet a permanent veil of
suppressed or subliminal uneasiness hung over all of
us. The wretchedness of a life of unrelieved toil and
dependence on the forces of nature had in the course of
time invested our declining race with a penchant for
melancholy. Though this may have suited our rough,

C5



PETER CAMENZIND

angular faces, it failed to produce fruit—at least any
that afforded pleasure. For that reason we were glad to
have in our midst a sprinkling of fools, who, though
only comparatively foolish, provided a touch of color
and some occasion for laughter and mockery. When-
ever an incident or escapade made one of them the
butt of local gossip, merriment would flash over the
wrinkled, deeply tanned faces of the people of Nimi-
kon, and the enjoyment of one’s own superiority added
a delicate philistine piquancy to the joke. They de-
lightedly smacked their lips, feeling confident that they
themselves were immune to such aberrations and
gaffes. To this majority—who occupied a middle
ground between the righteous and the sinners, and
gladly would have accepted the honors accorded both—
my father belonged. Every piece of tomfoolery filled
him with blissful uneasiness: he would teeter back and
forth between genuine admiration of the culprit and
smug awareness of his own innocence.

One of these fools was my Uncle Konrad. Not that he
was less bright than my father or any other villager.
Quite the contrary. He was sly enough, driven by an
ambitious spirit that the others might well have envied.
Yet nothing went right for him. To his credit, he did not
hang his head or become despondent over his failures;
instead, he renewed his efforts and even displayed a
remarkable awareness of the tragi-comical aspect of all

6 )



CHAPTER ONE

his endeavors. However, this last trait was ascribed to
comic eccentricity and merely earned him a place
among the community's unpaid jesters. My father’s
attitude toward Uncle Konrad was a constant tug-of-
war between admiration and contempt. Each new
project of his filled my father with avid curiosity and
excitement, which he sought to hide behind deceptively
ironic inquiries and allusions. He would restrain him-
self until Uncle Konrad, certain of success, began put-
ting on airs, whereupon my father joined the genius in
fraternal speculation. When the inevitable catastrophe
followed, my uncle would shrug it off, while my father
heaped fury and insults on him and then would not
favor him with a single word or glance for months.

‘It is to Uncle Konrad that our village is indebted for
its first sight of a sailboat, an experiment in which my
father’s skiff was a partial sacrifice. My uncle had
copied the sail and rigging from calendar woodcuts,
and could hardly be blamed if our skiff lacked the
necessary beam to carry a sail. The preparations took
weeks, with my father on tenterhooks from all the
tension, hope, and anxiety, while the rest of the village
talked of little else than Konrad Camenzind’s new ven-
ture. It was a memorable event when the boat was
finally launched on a windy day in late summer. My
father, filled with forebodings of imminent disaster, did
not attend the launching and, to my great disappoint-

(7



PETER CAMENZIND

ment, had forbidden me to go along. Baker Fiissli’s
son was the sailing expert's sole companion. The entire
village assembled on our graveled patch and in our
little garden to witness the extraordinary spectacle. A
snappy off-shore wind was blowing, but the baker’s son
had to row until the breeze caught the sail and it bellied
out; then the boat skimmed proudly away. Admiringly,
we watched them disappear around the nearest moun-
tain spur and prepared to accord my clever uncle a
victor’s welcome; we resolved to feel properly ashamed
for all snide doubts we had previously entertained. The
boat returned that night—without its sail, the sailors
more dead than alive. The baker’s son coughed and
sputtered: “You missed the best part, you almost had
yourselves a double funeral next Sunday.” My father
had to replace two planks in the skiff and since that day
no sail has been reflected in our lake's blue surface. For
a long time afterwards, whenever my uncle was in a
hurry, people would shout at him: “Use your sails,
Konrad!” Father bottled up his anger and for a long
while would avert his eyes when he encountered his
unlucky brother-in-law; spittle squirted in a wide arc as
a sign of his unspeakable contempt. This state of
affairs prevailed until Konrad approached him with his
project for a fireproof oven, a scheme which brought
infinite ridicule down on its inventor’s head and ended
up costing my father four whole talers. Woe to anyone

8 )



CHAPTER ONE

who dared remind him of the four-taler episode! Much
later, when our household was again in financial
straits, my mother casually remarked how nice it would
be if the criminally wasted money were available now.
My father turned purple but controlled himself; he
merely said: “I wish I'd drunk it all up some Sunday.”

Toward the end of each winter the Féhn approached
with a roar. The terrified people of the Alps listened to
it, trembling; yet, when away from home, they always
long to hear it.

The Fohn’s approach could be sensed by men and
women, bird and beast and mountain, several hours
beforehand. Its actual arrival, heralded almost always
by cool counter-winds, announced itself with a deep
whirring. The blue-green lake instantly turned ink-
black and was suddenly covered with scudding white-
caps. Though inaudible only minutes before, it soon
thundered against the shore like an angry sea. At the
same time the entire landscape seemed to huddle to-
gether. You could now discern individual rocks on pin-
nacles that usually brooded in remote heights, and
could distinguish roofs, gables, and windows in villages
that heretofore lay like brown dots in the distance.
Everything appeared to close in—mountains, meadows,
houses, like a frightened herd. Then the grumbling roar
began; the ground trembled. Whipped-up waves were
driven through wide stretches of air as spume, and the

(9



PETER CAMENZIND
desperate struggle between storm and mountain rang
continually in one’s ears, especially at night. A little
later, news would spread through the villages of choked
Mountain brooks, smashed houses, wrecked skiffs,
missing fathers and sons.

As a child, I was afraid of the Fohn, even hated it.
But with the awakening of boyhood wildness, I was
glad to welcome this insurgent, eternally youthful, inso-
lent harbinger of spring. It was marvelous as the Fohn
embarked on its ferocious struggle, full of life and
exuberance, storming, laughing, groaning, bending the
rough old pines with brutal hands so that they moaned.
Later my love of the Féhn deepened as I welcomed it
for bringing the beauty of the sweet, superbly rich
south, from which emanated streams of joy, warmth,
and beauty that were hurled against the mountains in
our flat, cool northlands. Nothing could be stranger or
more delicious than the sweet Féhn fever that over-
comes the people in the mountain regions, especially
the women, whom it robs of sleep, tantalizing their
senses. It is the south, hurling itself with all its heat
and violence against the breast of the coarser, poorer
north, informing the snowed-in Alpine villages that the
primrose, the narcissus, and the almond trees are in
flower again on the shores of Italian lakes.

Once the Féhn subsided and the last grimy ava-
lanches melted, the most beautiful season began. Then

Io )



CHAPTER ONE
yellowish meadows blossomed mountainward on all
sides; snow-capped peaks and glaciers led a contented
existence in their pure reaches; the lake turned warm
blue and mirrored the sun, the procession of clouds.

All this was certainly enough to round out childhood,
and even a lifetime. For all these events spoke the loud
and unbroken language of God, which never crossed the
lips of man. If you have heard God’s words proclaimed
in this fashion during childhood, you will be able to
hear them echo within you for the rest of your days,
sweet, strong, terrible; you will never escape their spell.
A native of the mountains can study philosophy and
natural history, and even dispense with God altogether,
but when he experiences the Féhn or hears an avalanche
crash through the forest, his heart trembles and he
thinks of God and death.

My father’s cottage had a tiny, fenced-in garden
where bitter lettuce, beets, and cabbage grew and where
my mother had laid out a touchingly narrow, barely
sufficient flower bed: two China rose bushes, dahlia,
and a handful of mignonette languished hopefully but
miserably. The garden bordered an even narrower
graveled area that reached as far as the lake. There
stood two defunct barrels, a few planks and some fence
posts to which we moored our boat, which at that time
was still patched and caulked every few years. The days
on which this operation was carried out are affixed in

( II



PETER CAMENZIND

my memory: warm afternoons in early summer, but-
terflies tumbling over the little garden in the sunlight,
the lake as smooth as oil, blue and still and softly irides-
cent, the mountain peaks thinly veiled in mist; the
gravel nearby smelling strongly of pitch and oil paint.
The boat would smell of tar all summer, and whenever
in later life I came upon the peculiarly distinctive odor
of tar and water I instantly visualized our graveled
landing area, with my father, in shirtsleeves, plying the
paint brush, bluish smoke curling from his pipe into the
summer air, brilliant sulphur butterflies unsteadily per-
forming their hesitating flights. On those days my
father was always in a high good humor: he whistled
(which he could do superbly) and he might even give
forth with one brief yodel—this, however, mezzo-forte.
Then my mother would cook something good for
dinner. I now think she did it in the secret hope that
Camenzind would not go off to the tavern that evening.
But he went all the same.

I cannot claim that when I was young my parents
either noticeably hampered or furthered my mental
development. Mother always had her hands full of
work, and nothing in the world interested my father
less than questions of child-rearing. He had plenty to do
tending his few fruit trees, cultivating the little potato
patch, and seeing to his crop of hay. But every few
weeks, on the way home in the evening, he would take

I2 )



CHAPTER ONE

me by the hand and proceed to the hayloft without a
word. There a strange rite of chastisement and atone-
ment was enacted: I was given a thrashing, and neither
my father nor I ever quite knew why. These were mute
sacrifices at the altar of Nemesis, offered up as a guilty
tribute to an ineffable power, without scolding on his
part or crying on mine. Any mention of “blind fate”
later in my life reminded me of these mystic scenes;
they seemed to me a graphic representation of this con-
cept. Unknowingly, my father was obeying a simple
pedagogic precept that life practices on all of us when
it lets lightning strike, leaving us to ponder what mis-
deeds provoked the powers above. Unfortunately, such
reflection rarely if ever occupied me; for the most part
I accepted each installment of punishment passively,
perhaps even stubbornly, always without the desirable
self-examination and always glad, on those evenings,
that once again I had done my share, that I had a few
weeks’ respite ahead of me. I was far less passive, how-
ever, when it came to my father’s efforts to get me to
work. Incomprehensible, bountiful nature had com-
bined within me two diametrically opposed talents:
unusual physical strength and an equally strong disin-
clination to work. My father exerted every effort to make
a useful son and helper out of me, and I resorted to
every possible ruse to evade the tasks imposed; no hero
of antiquity, when I attended school, commanded my

( 13



PETER CAMENZIND
sympathy more than Hercules, who was compelled to
perform those renowned, irksome labors.

I knew of nothing more wonderful than roaming idly
about the mountains and meadows or along the lake.
Mountains, lake, storm, and sun were my companions.
They told me stories, molded me, and were dearer to me
for many years than any person or any person's fate.
But what I loved above all else, even more than the
glistening lake, the mournful pines, and the sunny
rocks, were the clouds.

Show me a man anywhere in the whole wide world
who knows and loves clouds more than I! Or show me
anything more beautiful. They are a plaything and
comfort to the eye, a blessing and a gift of God; they
also contain wrath and the power of death. They are as
delicate, soft, and gentle as the souls of newborn babes,
as beautiful, rich, and prodigal as good angels, yet
somber, inescapable, and merciless as the emissaries of
death. They hover as a silvery film, and sail past smil-
ing and gold-edged; they hang poised, tinged yellow,
red, and blue. Darkly, slowly they slink past like mur-
derers, roaring head-over-heels like mad horsemen,
drooping sadly and dreamily in the pale heights like
melancholy hermits. They assume the shapes of blessed
isles and guardian angels, resemble threatening hands,
fluttering sails, migrating cranes. They hover between
God’s heaven and the poor earth like beautiful like-

14 )



CHAPTER ONE

nesses of man’s every yearning and partake of both
realms—dreams of the earth in which the sullied soul
cleaves to the pure heaven above. They are the eternal
symbol of all voyaging, of every quest and yearning for
home. And as the clouds are suspended faintheartedly
and longingly and stubbornly between heaven and
earth, the souls of men are suspended faintheartedly
and longingly and stubbornly between time and
eternity.

O lovely, floating, restless clouds! I was an ignorant
child and loved them, watched them, little knowing
that I would drift through life like a cloud—voyaging,
everywhere a stranger, hovering between time and eter-
nity. Ever since childhood they have been my dear
friends and sisters. There is not a street I cross without
our nodding and greeting each other. Nor did I ever
forget what they taught me then: their shapes, their
features, their games, their roundelays and dances,
their repose, and their strange stories in which ele-
ments of heaven and earth mingled.

Particularly the tale of the Snow Princess, which has
the middle mountain ranges for a setting, early in
winter, as warm air flows in from the lower reaches.
The Snow Princess, coming down from immense
heights, appears on this stage in the company of a
small retinue and looks for a place of repose in the
broad mountain hollows or on a summit. The false

( 15



PETER CAMENZIND

North Wind enviously watches the trusting maiden lie
down to rest and inches voraciously up the mountain,
to fall upon her suddenly with a furious roar, tossing
black-cloud rags at the beautiful Princess, mocking her,
intent on chasing her away. Momentarily the Princess
is disconcerted, but she waits and patiently suffers her
adversary; sometimes she retreats unhappily, in quiet
scorn, to her former height. At other times she gathers
her frightened entourage about her, unveils her daz-
zlingly regal countenance, and motions the ogre to
stand back. He temporizes, howls, then flees. And she
beds down quietly and shrouds her throne in white
mists as far as the eye can see, When the mist has
withdrawn, the peaks and hollows lie clear, glistening
with pure soft new snow.

This story has something in it so noble, of such
soulfulness, has in it so much of beauty’s triumph that
I was enthralled by it; my heart stirred as with a happy
secret.

Soon the time came when I was allowed to approach
the clouds, walk among them, and gaze down upon
their host from above. I was ten years old when I
climbed my first mountain, the Sennalpstock, at whose
foot lies our hamlet, Nimikon. That was the first time I
beheld both the terror and beauty of the mountains.
Gaping ravines, filled with ice and half-melted snow,
glass-green glaciers, moraines ugly beyond belief, and

16 )



CHAPTER ONE

suspended above all this, like a bell, the dome of
heaven. When you have lived for ten years surrounded
by mountains and hemmed in between mountain and
lake, you can never forget the day you see your first
wide sky above you, and the first boundless horizon.
Even on the ascent I was amazed at how huge the
familiar crags and cliffs really were. And now, quite
overcome, I saw with fear and joy in my heart the
immense distances bearing down upon me. So that was
how fabulously wide the world was! And our village,
lost in the depth below, was merely a tiny, light-colored
speck. Pinnacles that had seemed to be within walking
distance lay days apart.

I guessed that I had had only a glimpse of the world,
not a full view at all. I realized that mountains could
rise and crumble out there in the world, and great
events transpire, without the slightest whisper reaching
our isolated hamlet. Yet something quivered within me,
like a compass needle striving with great energy, uncon-
sciously, toward those great distances. And as I gazed
into the infinite distances into which the clouds were
voyaging, I grasped something of their beauty and
melancholy.

My two adult companions praised my climbing as we
rested briefly on the ice-cold summit. They were
amused by my enthusiasm. Once recovered from my
initial astonishment, I bellowed like a bull with joy and

(17



PETER CAMENZIND
excitement, into the clear mountain air. This was my
first inarticulate hymn to beauty. I expected a loud
echo, but my voice died away in the peaceful heights
like the faint cry of a bird. Then I felt abashed and was
silent.

That day was the beginning. One momentous event
now succeeded another. For one thing, the men took me
along on mountaineering trips more often, even on the
more difficult climbs, and with a strange and uneasy
ecstasy I penetrated the great secret of the heights.
Then I was made village goatherd. On one of the slopes
where I usually drove my beasts was a sheltered nook
overgrown with cobalt-blue gentians and bright-red
saxifrage. In all the world this was my favorite spot. I
could not see the village from there, and only a narrow,
gleaming strip of lake was visible across the rocks, but
the flowers glowed in fresh, laughing colors, the blue
sky hung like a canopy over needle-sharp peaks, and
the tinkling goat bells mingled with the incessant roar
of a nearby waterfall. There I sprawled in the warmth,
gazed in wonderment at the hurrying white cloudlets,
and yodeled softly to myself until the goats noticed my
laxness and took advantage of it, indulging in all sorts
of forbidden games and tricks. This idyllic existence
suffered a rude interruption during the first weeks,
when I fell into a gully with a goat that had strayed
from the flock. The goat died, my head ached, and I

18 )



CHAPTER ONE
received an unmerciful hiding. I ran away from home,
and was recaptured amid curses and lamentations.

These adventures might well have been my first and
last. In which case this little book would not have seen
the light of day and quite a number of other efforts and
foolish acts would not have been perpetrated. Presum-
ably I would have married one of my cousins and might
even lie frozen in some glacier now. That would not
have been the end of the world either. However, every-
thing turned out differently and it would be presumptu-
ous to compare what happened with what might have
been.

Occasionally my father would do a little work for the
monastery in Welsdorf. One day he fell ill and ordered
me to notify the monastery that he was unable to come.
Instead of traipsing to the monastery myself, I bor-
rowed pen and paper from a neighbor, wrote a courte-
ous letter to the friars, handed it to the woman who
regularly took messages there, and set off into the
mountains on my own.

The following week I came home to find a priest
sitting there, waiting for the person who had written
the letter. I was afraid, but then the priest praised me
and tried to persuade my father to let me become a
student. Uncle Konrad was in good graces at the time
and was consulted. He was inflamed by the idea that I
should study and eventually attend the university and

( 19



PETER CAMENZIND
become a scholar and a gentleman. My father allowed
himself to be convinced, and thus my future took its
place alongside my uncle’s other risky ventures—the
fireproof oven, the sailboat, and his similarly fantastic
schemes.

I entered then upon a period of intense study, espe-
cially in Latin, Biblical history, botany, and geog-
raphy. At that time I thoroughly enjoyed my studies; it
never occurred to me that I might be buying all this
foreign matter at the cost of my home and many years
of happiness. Nor was Latin solely to blame. My father
would have liked to make a farmer of me even if I had
known all the viri illustres by heart. But the shrewd
man penetrated to my innermost being and discovered
there, as its center of gravity, my cardinal virtue:
lassitude. I dodged work whenever possible and would
run off to the mountains or the Jake or lie hidden on a
slope, reading and dreaming and lazing away the time.
Realizing this, my father finally gave up on me.

This then is a good moment to say a few words about
my parents. My mother, who had been beautiful, re-
tained only her firm, straight frame and lively, dark
eyes. She was tall, vigorous, industrious, and quiet.
Though she was certainly as intelligent as my father,
and stronger, she did not rule the house, leaving the
reins in his hands. He was of average height, with thin,
almost delicate limbs, and a stubborn, sly head, a light-
complexioned face lined with tiny, exceptionally ex-

20 )



CHAPTER ONE

pressive wrinkles. His forehead was marked by a deep
vertical fold that darkened whenever he moved his
brows, lending him a doleful, ailing expression. At
those times he looked as if he were trying to recollect
something very important but lacked all hope of ever
finding out what it was. You could detect a certain
strain of melancholy in him, but no one paid this any
heed. For almost all people in our region were victims
of a slightly dour turn of mind, caused by the long
winters, the dangers, the harsh and wearying struggle
for survival, and the isolation from the world outside.

I have inherited important traits from both my par-
ents. A modest worldly wisdom, a trust in God, and a
calm, taciturn disposition from my mother, and from
my father, irresoluteness, the inability to handle
money, and the art of drinking heavily and with full
awareness of it. However, the last-mentioned trait was
not in evidence during my tender years. I have my
father’s eyes and mouth, my mother’s slow, heavy gait,
her build and her strength. My father in particular, and
our people in general, endowed me with natural peas-
ant cunning but also with their melancholy and ten-
dency to baseless fits of depression. Since it was my
destiny for many years to make my way far from home,
among strangers, I would have been better equipped
had I taken a good measure of lightheartedness with
me on my travels.

Fitted out with these characteristics and a new set of

( 21



PETER CAMENZIND
clothes, I began my journey into life. My parents’ gifts
have stood me in good stead, for I went out into life and
have held my own ever since. Yet something must have
been amiss that science and a wordly life never set
right. Though I can scale a mountain, row for more
than ten hours at a stretch, and if necessary kill a man
singlehanded even today, I am as incompetent as ever
in the art of living. My early, one-sided preoccupation
with the earth, flowers, and animals has stunted in me
the growth of most social graces. Even today my
dreams offer remarkable proof of how much I tend
toward a purely animal existence. For I often dream of
myself lying on some shore as an animal, generally as a
seal, conscious of such an intense feeling of well-being
that, on waking, the recovery of my human dignity fills
me not with pride or joy but with regret.

I was given the usual preparatory-school education,
although my board and tuition fees were waived; it was
decided that I should become a philologist. No one
knows exactly why. There isn’t a more useless or more
tiresome subject, and none with which I felt less
kinship.

My school years passed quickly. Fights and lessons
alternated with hours during which I felt homesick, and
hours filled with impudent dreams about the future or
devoted to the worship of science. In the midst of this,
my innate lassitude would suddenly assert itself, get-

22 )



CHAPTER ONE
ting me into all kinds of trouble, unti] thwarted by some
new enthusiasm.

“Peter Camenzind,” said my Greek professor, “you
are stubborn and single-minded and one of these days
you'll break your neck.” I took a close look at the stout,
bespectacled figure, calmly listened to his pronounce-
ment, and found him amusing.

“Peter Camenzind,” remarked the mathematics in-
structor, “you're a genius when it comes to wasting time
and I regret that the lowest mark I can give you is zero.
I estimate that your exercise today deserves a minus
two and a half.” I looked at him, pitied him because he
squinted, and thought him very tedious.

“Peter Camenzind,” my history professor once said,
“you're no great shakes as a student, but you'll make a
good historian all the same. You are lazy but you know
how to differentiate between the momentous and the
trivial.”

Even that did not strike me as exceptionally impor-
tant. Still, I respected my teachers because I thought
they were in possession of the secret of science and
science overawed me. And though my teachers were of
one mind about my laziness, I managed to make some
headway and my place in the classroom was just for-
ward of center. Indeed, it did not escape me that school
and school science were an inadequate patchwork, but I
was biding my time. Beyond these preparations and

( 23



PETER CAMENZIND
fumblings there lay, I assumed, a realm of pure intel-
lect and an unambiguous dead-certain science of truth.
Once I reached this realm I would discover the meaning
of the dark confusion of history, the wars of the
nations, and the fearful questions that bother each and
every soul.

Another yearning, however, held an even stronger
and more urgent sway over me: I longed to have a
friend. There was Kaspar Hauri, a brown-haired,
serious-minded boy two years older than I, who had
about him a calm and self-assured air, who held his
head erect and spoke little to his classmates. I ven-
erated him for months. I followed him about in the
streets and longed to be noticed by him. I felt envious of
every person he greeted and of every house I saw him
leave or enter. But he was two classes ahead of me and
presumably felt superior even to those in the same
grade as he. We never exchanged as much as a single
word. Instead, a puny, sickly boy attached himself to
me, without any encouragement on my part. He was
younger than I, timid and untalented, but he had beau-
tiful doleful eyes and features. Because he was weak
and somewhat misshapen, he was subjected to much
bullying in his class and looked to me, strong and
respected as I was, for protection. Soon he became too
ill to attend school. I did not miss him and quickly
forgot him altogether.

24 )



CHAPTER ONE

One classmate of mine was a boisterous fellow,
short, fair-haired, and easygoing, with a thousand
tricks up his sleeve—a musician, a mimic, and a clown.
It took some doing on my part to win his friendship and
this wily and irrepressibly cheerful little contemporary
always treated me somewhat patronizingly. But at least
I now had a friend. I visited him in his room, read a
number of books with him, did his Greek homework,
and in turn Jet him help me with math. We also went
on a number of walks together and must have looked
like bear and weasel on those occasions. He always
dominated the conversation, was gay, witty, and com-
pletely at ease; I listened and laughed and was glad to
have such a lighthearted friend.

One afternoon, however, I came upon him just as the
little charlatan was amusing several friends with one of
his favorite stunts. He had just impersonated one of the
teachers when he called out: “Guess who this is!” And
he proceeded to read a few lines from Homer, imitating
my embarrassed demeanor, my nervous voice, my rasp-
ing country accent, and my habit of blinking and shut-
ting my left eye when concentrating. It looked very
funny and was rendered wittily and ruthlessly.

As he closed the book and collected his well-deserved
applause, I stepped up to him from behind and had my
revenge. I said nothing but gave my shame and wrath
graphic expression with a single powerful slap in his

( 25



PETER CAMENZIND
face. Immediately afterwards the lesson began, and the
teacher noticed my former friend’s tears and his
swollen red cheek—this boy was also his favorite pupil.

“Who did that to you?”

“Camenzind.”

“Camenzind, stand up. Is that true?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Why did you slap him?”

No reply.

“Did you have a reason?”

“No, sir.”

So I was severely flogged and wallowed stoically in
the ecstasy of innocent martyrdom. But since I was
neither stoic nor saint but a schoolboy, I stuck my
tongue out at my enemy after I had been punished—to
its full length.

Horrified, the teacher let fly at me. “Aren't you
ashamed of yourself? What is the meaning of this?”

“It’s supposed to mean that he’s a rat and I despise
him. And he’s a coward besides.”

Thus ended my friendship with the mimic. He was to
have no successor, and I was forced to spend my
adolescence without a friend. And though my opinion
of life and of mankind has undergone a number of
changes since that time, I always remember that slap in
the face with deep satisfaction, and I only hope the
fair-haired boy hasn't forgotten either.

26 )



CHAPTER ONE

At seventeen I fell in love with a lawyer’s daughter.
She was beautiful and I am genuinely proud that all
my life I have fallen in love only with very beautiful
women. What I suffered because of her and other
women, I will tell another time. Her name was Rosi
Girtanner and even today she is worthy of the love of
better men than I.

At that time, all the untapped vigor of youth coursed
through my limbs. With my schoolmates I was forever
becoming involved in the wildest scrapes. I was proud
of being the best wrestler, batter, runner, and oars-
man—yet I still felt melancholy. This had hardly any-
thing to do with being unhappily in love. It was simply
that sweet melancholy of early spring, which affected
me more strongly than others, so that I derived plea-
sure from mournful visions of death and pessimistic
notions. Of course, someone was bound to make me a
gift of Heine’s Book of Songs, in a cheap edition. What I
did with this book did not really qualify as reading. I
poured my overflowing heart into the empty verses,
suffered with the poet, composed poems with him, and
entered states of lyrical intoxication that were as well-
suited to me as a nightgown to a little pig. Until that
time I had had no idea of “literature.” Now there
followed in rapid succession Lenau, Schiller, Goethe,
and Shakespeare; suddenly the pale phantom, litera-
ture, had become a god.

( 27



PETER CAMENZIND

With a delicious shudder, I felt streaming toward me
from these books the cool but pungent fragrance of a
life not of this world yet real nonetheless, a life whose
waves now pounded where it sought to realize its fate—
in my ecstastic heart. In my reading nook in the attic
the only sounds to reach me were the hourly chimes
from the nearby tower and the dry clapping of nesting
storks, but there the characters of Shakespeare’s and
Goethe's worlds walked in and out. The sublime and the
laughable aspects of everything human were revealed
to me: I realized the enigma of the sundered unruly
heart, the deep meaningfulness of the world’s history,
and the mighty miracle of the spirit that transfigures
our brief stay and through the power of reason raises
our petty lives into the realm of fate and eternity. When
I stuck my head out through the narrow dormer win-
dow, I could see the sun shining on the roofs and
in the narrow alley. With astonishment I would listen
to the tangled small noises of work and everyday
existence rushing up. I sensed the loneliness and mys-
teriousness of my attic nook filling with great spirits as
in remarkably beautiful fairy tales. And gradually, the
more J read and the more strangely the roofs, streets,
and everyday life affected me, the more often I was
overcome by the timid and intimidating feeling that I
too might be a visionary: the world spread out before
me expected me to discover part of the treasure, to rip

28 )



CHAPTER ONE

the veil that covered the accidental] and the common,
to tear my findings out of chaos and immortalize them
through the gift of poetry.

With some embarrassment I began composing a few
poems, and gradually several notebooks filled up with
verses, sketches, and short stories. They have perished;
probably they were worth little, but they made my heart
beat faster and filled me with ecstasy. My critical facul-
ties and powers of self-examination were slow in catch-
ing up with these attempts. I did not experience my first
great and necessary disappointment until my last year
in school. I had already begun the destruction of my
juvenilia—my scribbling had become suspicious to
me—when I came upon a few volumes of Gottfried
Keller’s works, which I immediately read two or three
times in succession. Then suddenly I realized how far
removed my stillborn pipe dreams were from real,
genuine, austere art. I] burned my poems and stories,
and with some of the embarrassed feeling that accom-
panies a hangover, I looked soberly and sadly out at the
world.

( 29





Chapter Two

AS FOR LOVE, I must confess to having retained a
youthful attitude to it all my life. For me, the
love of women has been a purifying act of adoration,
a flame shooting straight up from my melancholy, my
hands stretched in prayer toward the blue heavens.
Owing to my mother’s influence and my own indistinct
premonitions, I venerated womankind as an alien race,
beautiful and enigmatic, superior to men by virtue of
inborn beauty and constancy of character, a race which
we must hold sacred. For, like stars and blue mountain
heights, they are remote from us men and appear to
be nearer to God. Since life did not always treat me
gently, the love of women has been as bitter for me as
it has been sweet. Although I still cherish women, my
chosen role of solemn priest has often changed all too
quickly into the painfully comic one of fool.

Rosi Girtanner and I passed each other almost every
day on my way to dinner. She was seventeen, and with
her firmly supple body, thin face, and fresh skin, she
radiated the same quietly soulful beauty with which all
her ancestors were endowed and which her mother
possesses to this day. This ancient and blessed family

( 31



PETER CAMENZIND

for generations produced a line of women who were
quiet and distinguished, with blooming health and flaw-
less beauty. There exists a sixteenth-century portrait by
an unknown master of a daughter of the Fugger fam-
ily, one of the most delicious paintings I know: the
Girtanner women all bore some resemblance to her,
including Rdsi.

Of course, I was unaware of this likeness at that
time. I simply watched her as she walked by in her gay
dignity, and I sensed the nobility and simplicity of her
character. I would sit pensively in the dusk until I
succeeded in conjuring up a clear image of her. Then
an uncannily sweet shudder would shake my boyish
soul.

Before long these moments of joy became overcast
and cost me bitter pain. I suddenly realized that she
was a stranger: she neither knew me nor asked about
me. My beautiful vision was in fact a theft; I stole a
part of her blessed being. When I felt this with most
acute agony, I beheld her presence so distinctly and
breathtakingly alive that a warm wave of darkness
flooded my heart, making every nerve ache.

In the daytime this wave would suddenly overwhelm
me in the middle of class, or even in the middle of a
fight. I would close my eyes, lower my arms, and feel
myself slipping into a warm abyss, until the teacher's
voice or a classmate’s fist woke me out of my reverie. I
became withdrawn. I would run out into the open and

32



CHAPTER TWO

gaze with astonished dreaminess at the world. Now I
discovered how beautiful and varicolored everything
was, how all things were suffused with light and
breath, how clear and green the river was, how red the
roofs were, and how blue the mountains. This beauty
did not divert my attention; I only savored it quietly and
sadly. The more beautiful everything was, the more
alien it seemed, as I had no part in it and stood at its
edge. In this benumbed state, my thoughts would
gradually find their way back to Rosi: if I were to die at
this very moment, she would not know, would not ask,
or be distressed.

Yet I felt no wish to be noticed by her. I would gladly
have done something unheard of, performed some feat
in her behalf, or presented her with a gift without her
ever knowing who had given it. In fact, I did do great
things in her behalf. During a short vacation I went
home and performed any number of feats of prowess
every day, all of them, I felt, in Rési’s honor and glory:
I climbed a difficult peak from its steepest side; I took
extended trips with the skiff, covering great distances in
a short time. Returning burnt out and famished from
one of these excursions, it occurred to me to go without
food and drink until evening, all for the sake of Rosi
Girtanner. I carried her name and praise to out-of-the-
way summits and ravines where no human had ever set
foot.

I was also making up for the time my youthful body

(39



PETER CAMENZIND
had spent squatting in stuffy schoolrooms. My shoul-
ders broadened, my face and neck became tanned, and
my muscles swelled and became taut.

On the next to last day of vacation, I went to extreme
pains to gather my love a floral sacrifice. I knew of
several dangerous slopes covered with edelweiss, but
this odorless, colorless, sickly silver flower had always
seemed to me lacking in soul and beauty. Instead, I
decided on some bushes of rhododendron, the “Alpine
rose,” which had been blown by the wind into a
secluded cleft on a steep precipice. They had blossomed
late and could not be more difficult to reach. But I had
to find a way and, since nothing is unattainable to
youth and love, I finally did reach my goal—with sore
hands and feet. Shouting for joy was out of the ques-
tion in the position I was in, but my heart yodeled and
leaped deliriously as I snipped the tough stems and
held the booty in my hand. The descent had to be
accomplished by climbing backwards, the flowers be-
tween my teeth, and heaven only knows how I reached
the foot of the precipice in one piece. Since all other
rhododendron on the mountain had withered long be-
fore, I held the season's last in my hand, just budding
and breaking into delicate bloom.

Next day I did not put down the flowers even for a
moment throughout the entire five-hour trip. As I ap-
proached my sweetheart’s city, my heart at first beat

34 )



CHAPTER TWO

with excitement. Yet the farther the Alps receded, the
more my inborn love drew me back to them. The
Sennalpstock had long faded from view when the
jagged foothills disappeared, sinking away one after
another, each one detaching itself with a delicate woe
from my heart. Now all the hills of my homeland had
vanished and a broad, undulating, light-green lowland-
scape thrust itself into view. This sight had not affected
me on my first trip away from home. Today uneasiness,
fear, and sadness overcame me—as though I were
destined to travel into flatter and flatter lands, to lose
the mountains and citizenship of my native land for-
ever. Simultaneously I beheld the beautiful face of my
RGsi, so delicate, alien, cool, and unconcerned that the
bitterness and anguish of it took my breath away. The
glad, spotless villages with slender spires and white
gables slipped past the window; people mounted and
dismounted, jabbered, laughed, smoked, made jokes—
all of them cheerful lowlanders, clever, open-minded,
smart people—and I, a stolid mountain youth, sat
morose and silent among them. I felt not at home here,
I felt permanently kidnapped from my mountain region
and certain that I would never be as cheerful, smooth,
and self-assured as anyone from the lowland. They
would always be able to make fun of me, one of them
would marry the Girtanner girl, and one of them would
always stand in my way, be a step ahead of me.

( 35



PETER CAMENZIND

Such were the thoughts that were with me on my
way into town. There, after a brief look around, I
climbed to my room in the attic, opened my foot locker,
and took out a large sheet of wrapping paper. When I
had wrapped my flowers in it and tied the package
together with a string I had brought with me for that
purpose, the parcel did not look at all like a gift of love.
I solemnly carried it to the street where lawyer Gir-
tanner lived and at the first opportune moment I
stepped through the open door, glanced briefly into the
dimly lit hallway, and deposited the ill-shaped bundle
on the wide staircase.

No one saw me and I never found out if Rési re-
ceived my greeting. But I had the satisfaction of having
climbed a steep precipice, of having risked my life to
place a spray of rhododendron on a staircase. This
knowledge contained something sweet, melancholy,
and poetic, which made me feel very good; I can feel it
even today. Only in times of complete despair does it
occur to me that this “adventure with the Alpine roses”
might have been as quixotic as all my other love affairs.

This, my first love, never came to any conclusion—
its echo receded gradually and enigmatically. Unre-
lieved throughout my adolescence, it always accom-
panied me whenever I fell in love later on, like a quiet
elder sister. Nor have I ever been able to imagine
anything purer, lovelier, or more beautiful than that

36 )



CHAPTER TWO
well-born, calm-eyed patrician’s daughter. Many years
later, when I happened to see the anonymous, enig-
matic portrait of the Fugger daughter at an exhibition
in Munich, it seemed to me that my whole enthusiastic,
melancholy youth stood before me, gazing forlornly
from the depths of its unfathomable eyes.

Meanwhile I slowly and cautiously sloughed off the
skin of childhood and gradually turned into a youth.
The photograph taken of me at that time shows a bony,
overgrown farm boy in shabby clothes, somewhat dull-
eyed, with ill-proportioned, loutish limbs. Only the head
reveals a certain precocity and firmness. With a kind of
astonishment, I watched myself discard my boyhood
ways. I looked forward to the university with somber
anticipation.

I was to study in Zurich and, in the event of my
doing particularly well, my patrons held out the possi-
bility of an extended educational tour through Europe.
All this appeared to me as a beautiful classical picture:
I visualized myself sitting in a friendly grove solemnly
appointed with the busts of Plato and Homer, bent
over learned tomes, and on all sides an unhampered
view over the town, the lake and mountains, enchant-
ing vistas. I had become a little less confused, yet
livelier too, and looked forward to the good fortune
awaiting me with the firm conviction that I would prove
worthy of it.

( 37



PETER CAMENZIND

During my last year at school I took up the study of
Italian and made my first acquaintance with the old
novelists of Italy. I promised myself a more thorough
acquaintance with them as a bonus for my first year at
the university. Then the day came when I said goodbye
to my teachers and my housemaster, packed and se-
cured my little foot locker, and, with pleasurably
melancholy feelings, spent some time lounging about in
the vicinity of Rési’s house.

The vacation that now followed gave me a bitter
foretaste of life and made a mockery of my high-flown
dreams. The first shock was finding my mother ill. She
was bedridden, hardly spoke at all, and even my arrival
did not bestir her. I did not exactly feel sorry for myself,
but it hurt to find that my happiness and young pride
elicited no response. Thereupon my father informed me
that although he had no objections to my studying, he
was in no position to help financially. If my small
scholarship did not suffice, I would have to try to earn
the rest myself. By the time he was my age he had
eaten bread earned with his own two hands, and so
forth...

Neither did I have much chance to go hiking, boat-
ing, or mountain-climbing, for I had to help out in the
house and in the fields. During my half-days off, I did
not feel like doing anything at all, not even reading. It
enraged and exhausted me to observe how the common
daily life callously demanded its due and devoured the

38 )



CHAPTER TWO

abundance of optimism I had brought with me. My
father, once he had settled the question of money, was
as curt and harsh as ever, but not actually unfriendly.
Yet this did not make me any happier. The silent, half-
contemptuous respect my education and bookishness
elicited from him irked me, and I felt sorry that it did.
Moreover, I often thought of Rési and was again over-
come by the evil, indignant realization of my peasant
inability to turn myself into a self-assured man of the
world. For days I would ponder whether it might not be
better to stay home and forget about Latin, burying all
my hopes in the depressing regimentation of my miser-
able life at home. I went about tormented and
wretched; I found no solace at the bedside of my sick
mother. The picture of that imaginary grove with the
busts of Plato and Homer rose up to mock me, and 1
destroyed it, heaping upon it all the scorn and venom of
my tortured being. The weeks became unbearably
drawn out, as though I were destined to lose my entire
youth to this period of anger and frustration.

If the rashness and thoroughness with which life
destroyed my blissful dreams stunned and outraged me,
I was now amazed how suddenly even such agonies as
these could be overcome. Life had shown me its gray
work-a-day side; it now suddenly opened its infinite
depths to my riveted eye and laid the burden of experi-
ence with sobering effect upon my young heart.

While still in bed, early one hot summer morning, I

( 39



PETER CAMENZIND

felt thirsty. As I passed through my parents’ bedroom
on my way to the kitchen, I heard my mother groaning.
I went up to her bed. She neither noticed nor answered
me and continued to make the same dry, frightening
moans. Her eyelids quivered and her face had a bluish
pallor. Though anxious, I was not frightened until I
noticed her hands lying on the sheet as motionless as
sleeping twins. These hands told me that my mother
was dying: they seemed so sapped of all life, so deathly
weary as no living persons. I forgot my thirst and,
kneeling down beside her, placed one hand on her
forehead and tried to catch her eyes. When our gaze
met, hers was steadfast and untroubled but nearly
extinct. It did not occur to me to wake my father, who
lay nearby, breathing heavily. I knelt there for nearly
two hours and watched my mother die. Her death took
place with calm gravity and with courage, as befitted
her kind. She set me a noble example.

The little room was quiet. Gradually it filled with the
light of the new day; house and village lay asleep, and I
had ample time to let my thoughts accompany my
dying mother’s soul over house and village and lake and
snow-capped peaks into the cool freedom of a pure,
early-morning sky. I felt little grief, for I was overcome
with amazement and awe at being allowed to watch the
great riddle solve itself and the circle of life close with a
gentle tremor. The uncomplaining courage of the de-

40 )



CHAPTER TWO

parting spirit was so exalted that some of its simple
glory fell upon my soul as well, like a cool clear ray. My
father asleep beside her, the absence of a priest, the
homing soul not consecrated by either prayer or sacra-
ment—none of this bothered me. I felt only an ominous
breath of eternity suffuse the dawn-lit room and mingle
with my being.

At the very last moment—there was no light left in
her eyes—I kissed my mother’s wilted cool lips, for the
first time in my life. The strange chill of this contact
filled me with sudden dread. I sat on the edge of the bed
and felt tear after tear glide slowly, hesitantly down my
cheeks, chin, and hands.

Then my father awoke, saw me sitting there and,
still half asleep, asked me what was wrong. I wanted to
reply but was unable to utter a word. I left him and
reached my room in a daze. I dressed slowly and me-
chanically. Soon my father appeared.

“She is dead,” he said. “Did you know?”

I nodded.
“Then why did you let me go on sleeping? And no
priest attended her. May you be .. .” He uttered a

grievous curse.

At that point I felt an indefinable jab of pain in my
head, as though a vein had burst. I stepped up to him,
firmly grasped both his hands—his strength was a
boy’s compared to mine—and stared him in the face. I

( 41



PETER CAMENZIND
could not say anything, but he became still and timid.
When we both went to attend to my mother, the pres-
ence of death took hold of him too and made his face
strange and solemn. Then he bent down over the corpse
and began lamenting softly, childlike, in high, feeble
tones, almost like a bird.

I left him and went to tell the neighbors. They
listened to me, asked no questions, shook my hand, and
offered their help to our orphaned household. One of
them went off to the monastery to fetch a priest. When
I returned, I found a woman in our stable milking the
cow.

The reverend father appeared, as did almost all the
women of the village, and everything went off punc-
tually and correctly as if of its own accord. Even the
coffin materialized without our having to lift a hand,
and I could see clearly for the first time in my life how
good it is, during difficult times, to be among one’s own
people and to be one of a small, self-sufficient com-
munity. Perhaps I ought to have thought about this
more deeply. For the next day, once the coffin had been
blessed and lowered and the odd assemblage of woe-
fully old-fashioned, bristly top hats—including my fa-
ther’s—had disappeared each into its own box and cup-
board, my father was seized with a fit of weakness.
All at once he began feeling sorry for himself, be-
moaning his misery in strange, largely Biblical,

42 )



CHAPTER TWO
phrases, complaining to me that now that his wife was
buried he would also lose his son. There was no stop-
ping it. Startled, I listened and was on the point of
promising him I would stay when—my lips were al-
ready parted—something very odd happened.

Everything I had thought and desired and longed for
since childhood appeared for a brief second before my
mind's eye. I saw great, beautiful tasks awaiting me,
books I would read and books I would write. I heard the
Foéhn sweep by, and saw distant blissful lakes and
shores bathed in southern lights and colors. I saw
people with intelligent, cultured faces walking past; I
saw elegantly beautiful women; I saw streets, mountain
passes leading over the Alps, and trains hurrying from
one country to the next—all this I beheld simulta-
neously, yet each part separately and distinctly. Behind
all of it was the boundless spread of a clear horizon
dotted with clouds. Learning, creating, seeing, voy-
aging—the abundance of life flared up in a fleeting
silver gleam before my eyes. And once again, as in my
boyhood, something trembled within me, a mighty, un-
conscious force straining toward the great distances of
the world.

I said nothing and let my father talk on, shaking my
head every so often, waiting for his impetuousness to
subside. This happened toward evening. Then I ex-
plained to him my irrevocable decision to study and to

€ 43



PETER CAMENZIND
seek my future home in the realm of intellect—with-
out, however, asking any support from him. He stopped
cajoling at this point and looked at me pitifully, shak-
ing his head. For he realized that I would go my own
way from now on, and would soon be completely es-
tranged from his way of life. As I write this, I can see
my father exactly as he sat that evening in the chair by
the window: his chiseled, shrewd peasant head motion-
less on the lean neck, his short hair beginning to turn
gray, his severe and simple features betraying the strug-
gle his tough masculinity was waging against grief and
the onset of old age.

Of these days a small but significant event remains
to be told. One evening, about a week before my de-
parture, my father put on his cap.

“Where are you off to?” I asked.

“Is that any of your business?”

“Well, you could tell me, if it’s not illegal.”

Whereupon he laughed and called out: “No reason
why you shouldn’t come along. You're no child any
more.” So we both went off to the tavern. A few farmers
were sitting in front of a jug of Hallauer, two wagoners
whom I did not know were drinking absinthe, and a
tableful of young fellows were conducting a noisy ses-
sion of a card game called jass.

I was used to drinking an occasional glass of wine,
but this was the first time I had entered a tavern with-

44 )



CHAPTER TWO

out actually being thirsty. I knew from hearsay that my
father was an accomplished drinker. He drank heavily,
and only the best, and consequently his household,
though he could not be said seriously to neglect it
otherwise, had floundered in a perpetual state of mis-
ery. I was impressed by how respectfully the innkeeper
and the other guests treated him. He ordered a liter of
Vaud, bade me pour it, and demonstrated the correct
manner of doing so. You have to begin pouring at a low
angle, gradually lengthening the jet, and bringing the
bottle down as low as possible at the end. Then he
began telling me about the different wines he knew,
wines he enjoyed on the rare occasions when he ven-
tured to town or over the border to the Italian side. He
spoke with deep respect of the dark-red Veltliner and
then proceeded to discourse in low, urgent tones about
certain bottled Vaud wines; finally, almost in a whisper
and with the expression of someone recounting a fairy
tale, he spoke to me of the Neuchatels. The foam of
certain vintages assumed the shape of a star on being
poured, and he drew a star on the table with a wet
finger. Then he entered into profound speculation as to
the nature and flavor of champagne, which he had
never tasted, and one bottle of which he believed could
make two men stark raving drunk.

Falling silent and pensive, he lit his pipe. Noticing
that I had nothing to smoke, he gave me ten centimes

€ 45



PETER CAMENZIND

for cigars. Then we sat opposite each other, blowing
smoke into each other's faces and slowly gulping down
the first liter of wine. The golden, piquant Vaud was
excellent. Gradually the farmers at the next table ven-
tured to join in our conversation and eventually came
over to join us—one by one, carefully and with much
self-conscious throat-clearing. It was not long before I
was the center of attention, and it became evident that I
had a fantastic reputation as a mountain climber. All
manner of foolhardy ascents and spectacular falls, en-
shrouded in myth, were recounted, disputed, and de-
fended. Meanwhile, we had almost drained our second
measure of wine. The blood was now rushing to my
head and uncharacteristically I began to boast, telling
of the hazardous climb along the upper wall of the
Sennalpstock where I had fetched Rosi Girtanner’s
roses. They refused to believe me, I protested, they
laughed, and I became furious. I challenged anyone
who disbelieved me to a wrestling match and informed
them that I could take care of the whole lot of them.
Thereupon a bandy-legged old farmer walked over to
one of the shelves and brought back a huge earthen-
ware jug, placing it on its side on the table.

“Til tell you something,” he said. “Tf you're all that
strong, why don’t you smash that jug with your fist?
Then we'll pay for as much wine as it holds. And if you
can’t do it, you'll pay for the wine.”

46 )



CHAPTER TWO

My father agreed to it at once. I stood up, wrapped
my handkerchief around my hand, and struck. The first
two blows had no effect. With the third, the jug shat-
tered. “Pay up,” crowed my father, beaming with de-
light, and the old farmer seemed to have no objections.
“Fine,” he said. “I'll pay for as much wine as the jug
takes. But that won’t be much any more.” Naturally the
shards would not hold even a measure, and so I had to
accept their kidding as the only return for the pain in
my arm. Even my father was laughing at me now.

“Well then, you've won,” I shouted and, filling the
biggest of the shards with wine from our bottle, poured
it over the old man’s bald pate. Now we had won and
the guests applauded.

Further horseplay of this sort followed. Then my
father lugged me home and we stumbled excitedly and
roughly through the room in which my mother’s coffin
had rested less than three weeks before. I slept as if
dead and felt like a complete wreck the next morning.
My father taunted me and carried on his activities,
pleased by his obvious superiority as a drinker. I silently
made a vow never to go drinking again and longed for
the day of my departure.

Finally it came and I left, but I did not keep my vow.
The golden Vaud, the dark-red Veltliner, the Neuchatel,
and many other wines and I began a long acquaintance
and have become the best of friends since.

( 47





Chapter Three

DRESSED IN A NEW BUCKSKIN SUIT and carrying a
small chest filled with books and other posses-
sions, I arrived in Zurich, ready to conquer a piece of
the world and to prove as quickly as possible to the
roughnecks back home that I was made of different
stuff from the other Camenzinds. For three wonderful
years I lived in the same drafty attic with its command-
ing view, studied, wrote poems, longed for and sensed
myself imbued with everything that is beautiful on
earth. Although I did not have a hot meal every day of
the week, every day and every night my heart sang and
laughed and wept with joy and cleaved fervently, long-
ingly to life.

This was my first real city. Greenhorn that I was, I
walked about wide-eyed and bewildered for several
weeks. It never occurred to me to admire genuinely or
be envious of city life—I was too much of a farm boy
for that—but the multitude of streets, houses, and
people delighted me. I observed how alive with car-
riages the streets were; I inspected the moorings on the
lake, the plazas, the gardens, the ostentatious civic
buildings and churches; I saw crowds hurry off to work,

C 49



PETER CAMENZIND
students dawdling, the well-to-do on outings, dandies
preening themselves, foreigners ambling aimlessly
about. The fashionably elegant and haughty wives of
the rich seemed to me like peacocks in a chicken yard,
pretty, proud, and a little foolish. No, I was not really
shy—only awkward and stubborn—and I had no
doubts that I was man enough to become thoroughly
acquainted with this lively city and to make my way
in it.

Making the acquaintance of a handsome young fel-
low who lived in two rooms on the second floor of my
house, and who was also a student in Zurich, was the
first move I made in this direction. Actually I did not
take this step myself, for he came up to me. I heard
him practicing the piano every day, and listening to
him, I felt for the first time something of the magic of
music, the most feminine, the sweetest of the arts. I
would watch him leave the house, with a book or a
score in his left hand, in his right a cigarette whose
smoke trailed behind him as he walked off with easy
and graceful steps. I was fascinated but I kept my
distance. I was afraid of making the acquaintance of
someone so easygoing, free, and well-to-do, fearing it
would only humiliate me and underscore my poverty
and rough manners. Then he came up to see me: one
evening there was a knock on my door. I was startled,
for no one had called on me before. He entered, shook

50 )



CHAPTER THREE
my hand, introduced himself, and his behavior was as
easy and natural as though we had known each other
for years.

“I wanted to ask whether you would like to play some
music with me,” he said. I had never touched an instru-
ment, much less played one. I told him this, adding that
except for yodeling I was without art but that his piano
playing had often drifted pleasurably and temptingly
up to my room.

“How wrong can you be!” he exclaimed. “Judging
from your looks, I could have sworn that you were a
musician. Very strange. But you can yodel. Then you
must yodel for me. Please, just once. I love the sound of
it.”

I was dismayed at the thought and explained that it
was impossible for me to yodel to order. It was only
possible on a mountain top, at least out in the open air,
and it would have to come spontaneously.

“Well then, yodel on a mountain. Is tomorrow ail
right with you? We could go for a walk somewhere,
toward evening. Just walk about, talk a little, climb
some mountain, and then you can yodel to your heart's
delight. Afterwards we can go eat at some village inn.
You have the time, don’t you?”

Oh, yes, I had all the time in the world and I quickly
consented. Then I asked him to play something for me
and we went downstairs into his large, well-furnished

( 51



PETER CAMENZIND
apartment. A few paintings in modern frames, a piano,
a certain decorative disorder, and the smell of expen-
sive cigarettes produced an atmosphere of comfortable
and relaxing elegance that was quite new to me.
Richard sat down at the piano and played a few bars.

“You know what that is, don’t you?” he said, nodding
in my direction. He looked quite extraordinary, turning
his head away from the keyboard, his eyes glowing.

“No,” I said, “I don’t know anything about music.”

“It's Wagner,” he called back. “It’s from Die Meister-
singer.” And he continued playing. The music sounded
light and vigorous, longing and exuberant, and I felt as
though immersed in a warm, effervescent bath. Lvok-
ing with secret joy at his neck, at the backs of his pale
Mmusician’s hands, I was overcome by the same feeling
of tenderness and respect with which I had once looked
at the dark-haired student from my schooldays, as well
as by the shy premonition that this handsome, distin-
guished person might really become my friend and
make my old but unforgotten wish for such a friend-
ship come true.

Next day I went to get him. Slowly, and talking all
the way, we climbed to the top of a medium-sized hill
and gained a view of the city, the lake, and the gardens
and savored the rich beauty of early evening.

“And now you can yodel,” said Richard. “If you're
still embarrassed, turn your back to me. But loud, if you
please.”

52 )



CHAPTER THREE

He should have been well satisfied. I yodeled madly,
exultantly, with every possible break and variation, into
the shimmering evening. When I stopped, he started to
say something, then just cocked his ear in the direction
of the mountains. From a distant peak there came a
reply, soft and long-drawn-out and swelling gradually,
a herdsman’s or a hiker’s answer, and we listened
quietly and happily to it. As we stood there listening, I
became aware for the first time in my life of the delight
of standing alongside a friend, gazing together into the
remote and hazy vistas of life. In the evening light, the
lake came alive with a soft play of colors. Shortly be-
fore sunset I noticed a few stubborn, impudently jagged
peaks jutting through the dissolving mist.

“That's where my home is,” I said. “The peak in the
middle is the Rote Fluh; on its right is the Geisshorn;
and farther off to the left is the Sennalpstock, which is
rounded on top. I was ten years and three weeks old the
first time I stood on its top.”

I strained my eyes to make out one of the peaks
farther south. After a while Richard said something
that I did not hear clearly.

“What did you say?” I asked.

“I said I now know your gift.”

“What's that?”

“You're a poet.”

At this point I blushed and became angry. I was
amazed that he had guessed.

( 53



PETER CAMENZIND

“No,” I exclaimed. “I'm not a poet. I did in fact write
a few verses when I was in school, but I haven’t written
anything for a long time.”

“Would you show them to me?”

“I’ve burned them. But even if I hadn’t, I wouldn’t
show them to you.”

“They must have been very modern, with a lot of
Nietzsche in them, I imagine.”

“Who's he?”

“Nietzsche? My God, here’s a fellow who doesn’t
know Nietzsche!”

“No. How could I?”

He was delighted that I did not know Nietzsche, and
I became furious and asked him how many glaciers he
had scaled. When he said he hadn't scaled any, I teased
him as much as he had teased me. Then he put his
hand on my shoulder and said in a very serious tone of
voice: “You are touchy. But you've no idea how enviably
unspoiled you are, and how few people like you there
are on this earth. Look, in a year or so you'll know all
about Nietzsche and more and you'll know it much
better than I ever will, because you’re more thorough
and brighter than I. But J like you the way you are now.
You don’t know Nietzsche and Wagner but you've
climbed mountains and you have such a sturdy moun-
tain face. And there’s absolutely no doubt that you're a
poet. I can see it from your glance and your forehead.”

I was amazed that he should look at me so directly

54 )



CHAPTER THREE

and express his views with such frankness and lack of
embarrassment. It struck me as most unusual. I was
even more astonished and delighted when a week later,
in a very crowded beer-garden, he swore eternal friend-
ship, jumped up and embraced me and kissed me in
front of all the customers, and then danced me around
the table as though he were mad.

“What will people think?” I tried to admonish him.

“They'll think: those two are extraordinarily happy
or more than extraordinarily drunk. But most of them
won't give it any thought at all.”

Though he was older, cleverer, better brought up,
and better versed in everything than I, he seemed often
a mere child in comparison. On the street, for instance,
he would suddenly flirt half-mockingly with teenage
girls or he would interrupt the most serious piece of
music with a childish joke. On one occasion when we
had gone to church he suddenly whispered to me in the
middle of the sermon: “Don’t you find that the priest
looks like a wizened rabbit?” The comparison was per-
fect but I felt he could just as well have pointed it out
after church and I later told him so.

“But it was true, wasn’t it?” he grumbled. “I probably
would not have remembered it afterward.”

It did not bother me or others when his jokes fell flat
or were little more than quotes from a book. What we
liked about him was not his wit and intelligence, but his
free and lighthearted air and the irrepressible gaiety of

( 55



PETER CAMENZIND
his transparently childish nature, which could break
forth at any moment.

Richard often took me along when he went to meet
other people our age—students, musicians, painters,
writers, and foreigners of all sorts. All the interesting,
art-loving, unusual persons in town eventually made
his acquaintance. Among them there were very serious,
deeply committed people—philosophers, aestheticians,
socialists—and I was able to learn something from all
of them. Bits of knowledge from a wide variety of fields
came my way and I tried to supplement them by much
reading on the side. I gradually gained a fairly clear
notion of what fascinated and tormented the liveliest
spirits of the day and, moreover, gained stimulating in-
sights into the wishes, premonitions, achievements, and
ideals of the intellectuals. These attracted me and I un-
derstood them, but I myself lacked any strong urge to
take sides on any of the issues, either pro or con. I dis-
covered that in most cases the intellectual fervor was
directed at analyzing the conditions and the structure
of society and the state, at the sciences, the arts, and at
teaching methods. Yet only a small minority seemed
aware of the need to develop their own selves and to
clarify their personal relationship to time and eternity.
And in my case, the awareness of this need was not
very great at that time.

I made no further friends because of my exclusive

56 )



CHAPTER THREE

and jealous affection for Richard. This was so exclusive
that I even tried to draw him away from the many
women he knew. When we arranged to meet, I was
always scrupulously punctual, however unimportant
the event, and I was very touchy if he kept me waiting.
Once he asked me to call for him at a certain hour to go
rowing. I did not find him home and waited three
hours. The next day I reproached him bitterly.

“Why didn’t you go rowing by yourself?” he laughed.
Td completely forgotten about it. That isn’t a catas-
trophe, is it?”

“I'm accustomed to keeping promises to the letter,” I
replied heatedly and pompously. “But of course by now
I'm used to its not mattering to you at all that you
keep me waiting—not if one has as many friends as
you...”

He looked at me with immense astonishment. “Do
you take trifles like that seriously?”

“My friendship is more than a trifle to me.”

“This saying made such deep impress

That he swiftly swore redress . . .

Richard quoted solemnly. He seized my hand and
rubbed his nose affectionately against mine in Eskimo
fashion, until I freed myself from him with an angry
laugh. But the friendship had been repaired.

( 57



PETER CAMENZIND

Modern philosophers, poets, critics—in borrowed,
often expensive editions—literary reviews from Ger-
many and France, new plays, Parisian feuilletons, and
the works of the fashionable Viennese aestheticians
were all piled up in my attic. I read them quickly but
reserved most of my attention for my old Italian novel-
ists and my historical studies. I wanted to have done
with philology as soon as possible and devote myself
exclusively to history. Besides works on general history
and historical methodology, I read sources and mono-
graphs about the late Middle Ages in Italy and France,
and in this reading I made my first acquaintance with
my favorite among men, the most godly and most
blessed of saints, Francis of Assisi.

That dream of mine which had shown me the splen-
dor of life and intellect came true each day and warmed
my heart with ambition, joy, and youthful vanity. In
the lecture halls I had to pay attention to serious, rather
dry, and occasionally somewhat tedious scholarship. At
home I returned to the intimate and devout or grue-
some tales of the Middle Ages, or to the more leisurely
old storytellers whose beautiful and well-appointed
world harbored me as if I were in a shadowy enchanted
corner. Or I. felt the wild wave of modern ideals and
passions sweep over me. In between I would listen to
music, laugh with Richard, be with him and his friends,
meet Frenchmen, Germans, and Russians, listen to
strange modern books being read aloud, visit painters’

58 )



CHAPTER THREE
studios or attend soirees at which crowds of excited and
muddled intellectuals surrounded me as if at some
fantastic carnival.

One Sunday when Richard and I were visiting a
small exhibition of new paintings, my friend stopped
short before a picture of a mountain with a few goats
on its slope. It was carefully and nicely executed, but it
was a little old-fashioned and lacked artistry. You can
find pretty, relatively trivial paintings like this in every
salon, but still this painting pleased me because it was a
fairly accurate rendering of the meadows where I grew
up. I asked Richard what had attracted him to the
picture.

“This,” he said, pointing to the signature in the
corner, I could not decipher the reddish-brown letters.
“The painting,” Richard continued, “is no great achieve-
ment—any number like it are more beautiful—but
there is no painter more beautiful than the woman who
painted it. Her name is Erminia Aglietti, and if you like
we can call on her tomorrow and tell her she’s a great
painter.”

“Then you know her?”

“Yes. If her paintings were as beautiful as she is, she
would be wealthy and would not be painting any more.
For she does not enjoy it and paints only because she
happens not to have learned any other way to make a
living.”

Richard forgot all about it and did not mention her

( 59



PETER CAMENZIND
again until a few weeks later. “I ran into the Aglietti
girl yesterday. We were going to visit her a couple of
weeks back, you remember. Come on. Your collar is
clean, isn’t it? She’s a bit finicky about that.”

My shirt was clean and we went off to see the Aglietti
girl, I not without misgivings, for the rather rough and
ready relationship of Richard and his friends with
women painters and students had never appealed to
me. The men were quite ruthless—sometimes coarse,
sometimes sarcastic; the girls, on the other hand, were
practical, clever, and shrewd—and devoid of the
ethereal haze in which I preferred to see and venerate
women.

I entered the studio feeling somewhat apprehensive.
I was used to the atmosphere of painters’ workshops,
but this was my first time in a woman’s studio. It made
a simple, well-ordered impression. Three or four fin-
ished paintings hung in their frames; another, on
which she had just begun, stood on the easel. The other
walls were covered with neat, attractive pencil
sketches. There was also a half-filled bookcase. The
painter coolly accepted our greeting. She laid down her
brush and leaned against the bookcase in her smock,
looking as though she did not want to waste much time
on us.

Richard showered her with extravagant praise of
the picture we had seen at the exhibition. She laughed
and cut him short.

6o )



CHAPTER THREE

“But I might want to buy the painting. Besides, the
cows in it are so true tolife .. .”

“But they're goats,” she said quietly.

“Goats? Of course, goats. Observed with an accuracy
that is absolutely breathtaking. They are about to leap
off the canvas, completely goatlike. Just ask my friend
Camenzind, a son of the mountains himself. He'll back
me up.”

I felt the painter’s eye sweep over me critically, while
I listened with a mixture of embarrassment and amuse-
ment to the banter. She looked at me for some time,
quite uninhibitedly.

“You are from the mountains?”

“Yes.”

“It's obvious. Well, how do you feel about my goats?”

“Oh, they’re excellent. I certainly never thought they
were cows as Richard did.”

“Very nice of you to say so. Are you a musician?”

“No, a student.”

She said nothing further to me and now I had a
chance to observe her. Her long painter’s smock hid and
distorted her figure, and her face did not strike me as
beautiful. The features were sharp and sparse; the eyes
a little hard; the hair full, black, and soft. What
bothered me—almost repelled me—was her com-
plexion: it made me think at once of Gorgonzola; I
would not have been surprised to find greenish veins in
it. I had not seen this Italian paleness before, and now,

( 61



PETER CAMENZIND
in the unfavorable morning light of the studio, her skin
looked startlingly like stone—not marble, but like some
weathered, highly bleached stone. And I was not in the
habit of testing a woman's face by its shape but was
accustomed—still in my somewhat boyish fashion—to
look for softness, hue, and loveliness of complexion.

The visit had put Richard in a bad mood too, so I was
astonished, actually frightened, when he said sometime
afterwards that the Aglietti girl would like to do a draw-
ing of me. It would only be a sketch; she was not
interested in my face but in my “typical” broad massive
figure.

Before we had a chance to discuss this at greater
length, something occurred which transformed my life
and set my future course for many years. Suddenly,
when I awoke one morning, I was a writer.

At Richard’s urging I had occasionally written brief
sketches and portraits of types in our circle and also a
few essays on literary and historical subjects—all of
them as accurate as possible, but purely stylistic ex-
ercises.

One morning, when I was still in bed, Richard came
in and placed thirty-five francs on my blanket. “They
are yours,” he said in a businesslike voice. Finally, after
I had exhausted all possible explanations, he drew a
page of a newspaper out of his pocket and showed me
one of my essays printed there. He had copied a num-

62 )



CHAPTER THREE
ber of my manuscripts and taken them to an editor
friend and sold them quietly behind my back. I now
held the first piece the editor had bought, as well as the
fee.

I had never felt as strange as I did then. Although I
was furious that Richard should have assumed such a
providential role, the first sweet pride in being a writer
and having earned the money, and the thought of a
certain, though small, literary fame, overcame my ir-
ritation.

Richard had me meet the editor in a café. The editor
asked if he might keep the other pieces Richard had
shown him and asked me to send more. He said my
pieces had a distinctive tone, particularly those on his-
torical subjects, and he would be glad to have more in
the same vein and would pay a good fee. Only then did
I fully grasp what had happened. Not only would I be
able to eat regularly and settle my small debts, but I
could abandon the course of studies I'd been compelled
to follow and might even be able to afford working
solely in my chosen field.

Meanwhile, the editor had a batch of new books sent
to my place for review. I worked my way through these
and was kept busy for several weeks. Since payments
were due at the end of the quarter and I had exceeded
my usual standard of living in anticipation of this
income, one day I found myself without a centime to

( 63



PETER CAMENZIND

my name and was forced to go hungry again. For a few
days I held out in my attic on a diet of bread and coffee,
then hunger pangs drove me out to a restaurant. I took
three books along to leave as security in lieu of pay-
ment, having already made a vain attempt to sell them
at a secondhand bookshop. The meal was first-rate.
Only after I drank my cup of black coffee did I begin to
fee] uneasy.

With some trepidation, I confessed to the waitress
that I was broke. Couldn’t I leave the books instead?
She picked one of them up from the table—a volume of
poetry—leafed through it with evident curiosity, and
asked whether she could read it. She liked reading, she
said, but somehow never had the chance to get hold of
good books. Then I knew I was saved. I suggested that
she take all three books as payment for my meal. She
accepted and over a period of time took seventeen
francs’ worth of books off my hands. For a slim volume
of poetry, I demanded a cheese sandwich; for a novel,
the same plus a glass of wine; a single novella was
worth a cup of coffee and a serving of bread.

As I remember, these were all quite insignificant
books written in a painfully cramped, fashionable
style, so the goodhearted girl probably received a
strange impression of modern German literature. With
real delight I can recollect mornings on which I would
race through a book, scribble a few lines of comment so

64 )



CHAPTER THREE

I would be done with it by noon, and take it to trade in
for lunch. But I took pains to hide my financial difficul-
ties from Richard, for I felt unnecessarily ashamed and
disliked accepting his help except in the most dire
circumstances.

I did not think of myself as a poet. What I wrote on
occasion was feuilleton stuff, not poetry. Yet I cher-
ished the hope that one day I would succeed in creating
a work of literature, a great, proud song of longing and
of life.

The clear, lighthearted mirror of my soul was over-
cast at times by a kind of melancholy. Yet it was not
seriously ruffled at first. These shadows appeared for a
day or a night in the form of dreamy, forlorn sadness,
then disappeared again without a trace, only to return
suddenly after weeks or months. I got used to this
sadness as to a mistress. I did not feel tortured but
experienced an uneasy weariness that had a certain
sweetness all its own. If this melancholy enveloped me
at night, I would lie for hours by the window gazing
down upon the black lake and up at the mountains
silhouetted against the wan sky, with stars suspended
above. Then a fearfully sweet, overpowering emotion
would take hold of me—as though all the nighttime
beauty looked at me accusingly, stars and mountain
and lake longing for someone who understood the
beauty and agony of their mute existence, who could

( 65



PETER CAMENZIND

express it for them, as though I were the one meant to
do this and as though my true calling were to give ex-
pression to inarticulate nature in poems.

I never gave any thought to how I would go about
doing this; I only sensed the beautiful grave night
mutely longing for me. And I never wrote a poem when
I was in such a mood, though I felt responsible for
these dark voices and usually would set out on an ex-
tended solitary walk after one of these nights. I felt that
in this fashion I requited a little the earth’s love which
offered itself up to me in silent supplication, an idea I
could only laugh at afterward. These walks, however,
became one of the bases of my later life, large parts of
which I have spent as a wanderer, hiking for weeks and
months from country to country. I grew used to trarnp-
ing on, with only a little money and a crust of bread in
my pockets, to being by myself for days on end and
spending nights out in the open.

I had forgotten the Aglietti girl now that I was be-
coming a writer. Then she sent a note: “I'm giving a tea
on Thursday at my place. Why don’t you come and
bring your friend?”

Richard and I went and found there a small coterie
of artists. For the most part they were unrecognized,
forgotten, or unsuccessful, which I found touching,
although all of them seemed quite contented and
merry. We were given tea, sandwiches, ham, and a

66 )



CHAPTER THREE

salad. Because I didn’t know any of the people and was
not gregarious anyway, I gave in to my hunger pangs
and for an hour did little but eat, quietly and persis-
tently, while the others sipped their tea and chattered.
By the time they were ready for food, I'd consumed
almost half the ham. I'd assured myself that there
would be at least another platter in reserve. They all
chuckled softly and I reaped a few glances so ironical
that I became furious and damned the Italian girl as
well as her ham, rose to my feet, and excused myself,
explaining curtly that I would bring my own dinner
along the next time. Then I reached for my hat.

The Aglietti girl took back my hat, looked astonished
at me, and begged me to stay. The soft lamplight fell on
her face and I was struck by the wonderfully mature
beauty of this woman. I suddenly felt very stupid and
naughty, like a school boy who has been reprimanded,
and I sat down again in a far corner of the room. There
I stayed, leafing through a picture album of Lake Como.
The others went on sipping their tea, paced back and
forth, laughed, and talked. Nearby a cello and violins
were tuning up. A curtain was drawn aside and I could
see four musicians at improvised stands ready to per-
form a string quartet. Erminia came toward me, placed
her cup on a side table, nodded kindly, and sat down
beside me. The quartet played for some time, but I did
not listen closely. I gazed with growing amazement at

( 67



PETER CAMENZIND

the slender, elegant woman whose beauty I had
doubted and whose refreshments I had gobbled up.
With mixed feelings of joy and apprehension, I now
remembered that she had wanted to draw me. Then my
thoughts returned to Rési Girtanner, for whom I had
climbed after rhododendron, and to the fable of the
Snow Princess, all of which now seemed to me to have
been preparation for the present moment.

When the music ended, Erminia did not leave me as
I had feared she would, but sat quietly beside me and
then began to talk. She congratulated me on one of my
pieces she had seen in the newspaper. She joked about
Richard, who was surrounded by girls and whose care-
free laughter could be heard above the laughter of all
the others. When she asked again if she could paint me,
it occurred to me to continue our conversation in Ital-
ian. I was not only rewarded with a happy, surprised
glance from her vivacious Mediterranean eyes, but had
the pleasure of hearing her speak the language that
best suited her lips and eyes and figure—the euphoni-
ous, elegant, flowing lingua toscana with a charming
touch of Ticino Swiss. I myself spoke neither beauti-
fully nor fluently, but this did not bother me at all. We
agreed I was to come and sit for her the next day.

“Arrivederla,” | said as we parted, giving as deep a
bow as I could.

“Arrivederci domani,” she smiled, nodding to me.

After leaving her house, I walked along the street

68 )



CHAPTER THREE
until it reached the ridge of a hill and I beheld the dark
landscape stretched out before me in beauty’s strong
repose. A solitary boat with a red lantern was gliding
over the lake; its blackness was broken by flickering
scarlet slivers, and an occasional wave fell in a silvery
silhouette. Laughter, mandolin music from a nearby
beer-garden. The sky was overcast and a strong warm
breeze swept across the hills.

Like the wind that caressed and shook and bent the
fruit trees and the black crowns of the chestnut trees
and made them moan, laugh, and quiver, so my passion
played within me. On that hilltop I knelt and groveled
on the ground, leaped up and groaned, stomped about,
tossed away my hat, buried my face in the grass,
grasped the tree trunks, cried, laughed, sobbed, raged,
wept with shame, shivered with bliss, and then felt
utterly crushed.

After an hour of this frenzy, all tension left me and I
felt choked by a kind of sultriness. My mind went
blank. I could reach no decision, I felt nothing; like a
sleepwalker I descended the hill, walked aimlessly back
and forth through town, found a tavern still open,
entered it without any real desire, drank two full mea-
sures of wine and got home, terribly drunk, in the
early morning.

Erminia was quite startled when she saw me that
afternoon.

“What happened? Are you ill?”

( 69



PETER CAMENZIND

“Nothing serious,” I replied. “It seems I got very
drunk last night, that’s all.”

She propped me on a chair and asked me not to
move. Soon I dozed off and slept through the entire
afternoon in her studio. Presumably it was the smell of
turpentine that made me dream of our skiff back home
being freshly painted. I lay on the gravel and watched
my father plying the paintbrush. Mother was there too
and when I asked her if she hadn't died, she replied
gently: “No. For if I were not here, you'd end up like
your father.”

I was awakened by falling off the chair and found
myself transplanted into Erminia Aglietti’s studio.
Though I could not see her, I gathered from the clatter-
ing of dishes and cutlery that she was preparing dinner.

“How are you?” she called to me.

“Fine. How long did I sleep?”

“Four full hours. Aren’t you ashamed of yourself?”

“A little. But I had such a beautiful dream.”

“Tell it to me.”

“Only if you come here and forgive me.”

She came but would not forgive me until I told her
the dream. So | recounted it in detail] and in the process
plunged deeply into half-forgotten childhood memories.
By the time I stopped, when it had grown dark outside,
I had told her and myself the story of my childhood.
She gave me her hand, smoothed my wrinkled jacket,

70 )



CHAPTER THREE

and invited me to sit for her again the next day, so that
I felt she had understood, as well as forgiven, my be-
havior.

Though I posed for her hour after hour during the
next few days, we scarcely talked at all. I simply sat, or
stood calmly, as if enchanted. I listened to the soft rasp
of the charcoal and inhaled the faint smell of paint,
delighting in the proximity of the woman I loved, while
her eyes rested on me all the time. The white studio
light bathed the walls, a few sleepy flies buzzed against
the panes, and in the small room adjacent to the studio
the flame hissed in the spirit lamp, for at the end of
each session she served me a cup of tea.

My thoughts remained with Erminia even when I
was back in my attic. It did not diminish my passion
that I was unable to admire her art. She herself was so
beautiful, so good and self-confident—what did her
painting matter to me? On the contrary, her industry
had a heroic quality: a woman battling for her liveli-
hood, a quiet, persevering, courageous heroine.

Anyway, there’s nothing more futile than ruminating
about someone you love; such thoughts are like a tread-
mill. That is one reason why my memory of the beauti-
ful Italian girl, though not indistinct, lacks many of the
small details and features that we notice more readily
in strangers than in those who are close to us. For ex-
ample, I cannot remember how she wore her hair, how

( 71



PETER CAMENZIND

she dressed, and so on, or even whether she was short
or tall. Whenever I think of her, I see a dark-haired,
nobly shaped head, a pair of radiant eyes set in a pale,
vivacious face with a beautifully shaped mouth. And
when I think of her and the time I was in love with her,
I always return to that night on the hill with the wind
blowing over the lake and myself weeping, overjoyed,
going berserk; and to one other night that I will tell of
now.

It had become clear to me that I would have to make
some kind of profession of love and actually woo her. If
we had not seen each other almost every day, I might
have been content to worship her from afar and suffer
in silence. But since I saw her so frequently, talked to
her, shook her hand, entered her house, my heart was
in a continuous state of torment and I could not endure
it for long.

Some artist friends of hers arranged a small party
in a beautiful garden beside the lake on a mild mid-
summer evening. We drank chilled wine, listened to
music, and gazed at the red Japanese lanterns that
were hung in garlands between the trees. We talked,
joked, laughed, and finally burst out in song. Some fool-
ish young painter was enjoying himself in the role of a
romantic fop; he wore his beret at a rakish angle and
lay with his back to the fence, fondling a long-necked
guitar. The few artists of consequence who had been

72 )



CHAPTER THREE

invited had not come or else sat off to the side. Some
girls had shown up in light summer dresses; others
wore the usual unorthodox costumes. Richard flirted
with the girls, and I, despite my inner turbulence, felt
cool, drank little, and waited for Erminia, who had
promised to let me take her out in a boat. When she
arrived, she made me a present of some flowers, and
we got into a small rowboat.

The lake was as smooth as oil and as colorless as the
night. I rowed the boat swiftly out onto the calm ex-
panse, all the while gazing intently at the slender
woman leaning back comfortably and _ contented
against the stern. As the sky gradually darkened and
one star after another glinted through the waning blue,
the sounds of music and of people amusing themselves
on shore drifted over to us. The sluggish water accepted
the oars with gentle gurgling, and other boats drifted
about here and there almost invisible in the calm. But I
paid little heed to them. My eyes were riveted on my
companion and my thoughts were fixed on a declara-
tion of love that clasped my anxious heart like a steel
ring. The beauty and poetry of the moment, the boat,
the stars, the tranquil lake, made me hesitant; it
seemed as though I would have to act out a sentimental
scene on a beautifully set stage. Fearful and numbed
by the profound stillness—for neither of us spoke—I
rowed as hard as I could.

( 73



PETER CAMENZIND

“How strong you are,” she said thoughtfully.

“You mean bulky, don’t you?”

“No, I mean muscular,” she laughed softly.

It was not a very appropriate beginning. Sadly and
angrily, I continued to row. After a while I asked her to
tell me something about her life.

“What would you like to hear?”

“Everything,” I said. “Preferably a love story. Then
Tll be able to tell you one of my own in turn. It is very
brief and beautiful and it will amuse you.”

“Well, let’s hear it!”

“No, you first. You already know much more about
me than I do about you. I would like to know if you've
ever been really in love or whether—as I'm afraid—you
are far too intelligent and proud for that.”

Erminia pondered for a while.

“That's another of your romantic notions,” she said,
“to have a woman tell you stories at night in the middle
of a lake. Unfortunately I can’t do it. You poets are
accustomed to finding words for everything beautiful
and you don’t even grant that people have hearts if they
are less talkative about their feelings than you. Well,
you couldn't be more wrong in my case, for I don’t think
anyone can love more passionately. I am in love with
a man who is married, and he loves me just as much.
Yet neither of us knows whether we will ever be able
to live together. We write to each other and occasionally
we meet... .”

74)



CHAPTER THREE

“Can I ask whether this love makes you happy or
miserable, or both?”

“Oh, love isn’t there to make us happy. I believe it
exists to show us how much we can endure.”

This I understood so deeply that I was unable to
repress a little moan, which escaped my lips instead of
a reply. She heard it.

“Ah,” she said, “so you know what it’s like. And you
are so young still! Do you want to tell me about it
now—but don’t unless you really want to.”

“Perhaps another time, Erminia. I don't feel up to it
now and I'm sorry if I've spoiled your evening by bring-
ing up the subject. Shall we turn back?”

“As you wish. How far from shore are we actually?”

I made no reply but dipped the oars violently into the
water, swung the boat about, and pulled as though a
storm were drawing near. The boat glided rapidly over
the water. Amid the confusion and anguish and morti-
fication seething within me, I felt sweat pouring down
my face; I shivered at the same time. When I realized
how close I had been to playing the suitor on his knees,
the lover rejected with motherly and kindly understand-
ing, a shudder ran down my spine. At least I had been
spared that, and I would simply have to come to terms
with my misery on my own. I rowed back like one
possessed.

Erminia was somewhat taken aback when I left her
as soon as we stepped on shore. The lake was as

( 75



PETER CAMENZIND
smooth, the music as lighthearted, and the paper
moons as colorful and festive as before, yet it all seemed
stupid and ridiculous to me now. I felt like hitting the
fop in the velvet coat, who still carried his guitar osten-
tatiously on a silk band around his neck. And there
were still fireworks to come. It was all so childish.

I borrowed a few francs from Richard, pushed my
hat back, and marched off, out of town, on and on,
hour after hour until I began to feel sleepy. I lay down
in a meadow but woke again within the hour, wet with
dew, stiff, shivering with cold, and walked on to the
nearest village. It was early morning now. Reapers on
their way to mow clover were in the streets, drowsy
farmworkers stared at me wide-eyed from stable doors,
everywhere there was evidence of farmers pursuing
their summer’s work. You should have stayed a farmer,
I told myself, and stalked shamefaced through the vil-
lage and strode on until the first warmth of the sun
allowed me to rest. At the edge of a beech grove I
flopped down on the dry grass and slept in the sun until
late afternoon. When I awoke with my head full of the
aroma of the meadow and my limbs agreeably heavy,
as they can only be after lying on God’s dear earth, the
fete, the trip on the lake, and the whole affair seemed
remote, sad, and half forgotten, like a novel read
months ago.

I stayed away three whole days, let the sun tan me,

76 )



CHAPTER THREE
and considered whether I should not head straight
home—now that I was underway—and help my father
bring in the second crop of hay.

Of course, my misery was not overcome as easily as
all that. After I returned to the city, I fled the sight of
Erminia. But it was not possible to keep this up very
long. Whenever we met afterward, the misery rose up
again in my throat.

(77





Chapter Four

THE MISERY OF UNREQUITED LOVE accomplished
what had been beyond my father’s powers. It
made me into a hardened drinker, and the effect of
drink on my life has been more lasting than anything
I have described so far. The strong sweet god of wine
became my faithful friend, as he remains even today.
Who is as mighty as he? Who as beautiful, as fantastic,
lighthearted, and melancholy? He is hero and magi-
cian, tempter and brother of Eros. He can do the im-
possible; he imbues impoverished hearts with poetry.
He transformed me, a peasant and a recluse, into a
king, a poet, and a sage. He fills the emptied vessels of
life with new destinies and drives the stranded back
into the swift currents of action.

Such is the nature of wine. Yet, as with all delightful
gifts and arts, it must be cherished, sought out, and
understood at great cost and effort. Few can accomplish
this feat and the god of wine vanquishes thousands
upon thousands; he ages them, destroys them, or ex-
tinguishes the spirit’s flame. However, he invites those
who are dear to him to feast and builds them rainbow
bridges to blissful isles. When they are weary, he cush-

( 79



PETER CAMENZIND
ions their heads; he embraces and comforts them like a
mother when they become melancholy. He transforms
the confusions of life into great myths and plays the
hymn of creation on a mighty harp.

At other times he is childlike, with long, silky curls,
narrow shoulders, and delicate limbs. He will nestle
against your heart, raise his innocent face up to you,
and gaze at you dreamily, astonished, out of big, fond
eyes in whose depths memories of paradise and kin-
ship with a god surge and sparkle like a forest spring.
The sweet god also resembles a stream wandering with
deep rushing sounds through the spring night; and
resembles an ocean that cradles sun and storms in its
cool waves.

When he communes with his favorites, the storm
tide of secrets, memories, poetry, and premonitions
floods and intoxicates them, The known world shrinks
and vanishes, and the soul hurls itself with fear and joy
into the uncharted distances of the unknown where
everything is strange and yet familiar, and the lan-
guage of music, of poets, and of dreams is spoken.

I must first recount how I discovered this secret.

Sometimes I would forget myself for hours and be
perfectly happy—I would study, write, or listen to
Richard play the piano. Yet not one day passed without
some slight unhappiness. At times it would not over-
whelm me until I had gone to bed, so that I moaned and
leaped up, only to fall asleep late at night, sobbing. Or

80 )



CHAPTER FOUR

it would stir within me after I had seen Erminia Ag-
lietti. But usually it would come upon me in the late
afternoon, at the onset of those beautiful, wearisome
summer evenings. I would walk down to the lake, untie
one of the boats, and row until I was tired and hot, but
then I would find it impossible to return home. Into a
tavern then or a beer-garden. There I sampled various
wines, and drank and brooded. The next day I occa-
sionally felt half sick. A dozen times I was overcome by
such ghastly misery and self-disgust that I resolved to
stop drinking altogether. Yet then I would go out and
drink again and again. Gradually, as I learned to dis-
tinguish among the wines and their effects, I began to
enjoy them with a genuine awareness. Finally I decided
in favor of the dark-red Veltliner. The first glass tasted
harsh and provocative, but then it clouded my
thoughts, so that they became calm and dreamy; as I
continued to drink, it cast its spell over me and began to
compose poems as if by itself. Then I would behold
myself surrounded by all the landscapes I had ever
loved, bathed in a delicious light, and I could see myself
wandering through them, singing, dreaming. Then I
sensed life coursing through me. This whole experience
resolved itself into comfortable melancholy, as though
I heard folksongs played on a violin, and knew of some
fortune somewhere that I had been close to and that
had passed me by.

It so happened that I gradually drank less often by

( 81



PETER CAMENZIND
myself, and now did so in the company of all sorts of
people. As soon as I was no longer alone, the wine
affected me differently; I became gregarious yet not
exuberant. I felt a strange cool fever. An aspect of my
character suddenly blossomed forth that belonged less
to the species of decorative garden flower than to the
species of thistle or nettle. As I became more eloquent a
sharp, cool spirit would take hold of me, making me
self-assured, superior, critical, and witty. If there were
people whose presence irked me, I quickly began need»
ling them—delicately at first, then coarsely and stub-
bornly until they left. Since childhood, I had never
found people indispensable or had great need of them.
Now I began to regard them with a critical, ironic eye. 1
preferred inventing and telling stories in which people's
relationships with one another were represented
satirically or were bitterly mocked. I had no idea how I
came upon this deprecatory tone; it erupted from me
like a long-festering sore and it was to stay with me for
years. If, for a change, I happened to spend an evening
drinking by myself again, I would again dream of
mountains, stars, and melancholy music.

During this time I wrote a number of sketches on
society, culture, and contemporary art, a venomous
little book which was the product of my barroom con-
versations. My historical studies, which I still pursued
assiduously, provided me with background material
that I used as a kind of underpinning for my satires.

82 )



CHAPTER FOUR

This book helped me become a regular contributor to
one of the larger newspapers, and I now had almost
enough money to live on. These sketches soon after-
ward were published in book form and were even quite
successful. I now abandoned philology altogether. I had
reached the upper echelons; connections with German
periodicals were forged as a matter of course and raised
me from my previous obscurity and impoverishment
into the circle of recognized authors. I was earning my
living; I relinquished scholarship. I was sailing rapidly
toward the despicable life of a professional man of
letters.

Despite my success and my vanity, despite my satires
and my unrequited love, the warm glow of youth—its
lightheartedness and sadness—still enveloped me. De-
spite my gift for irony and a harmless touch of the
supercilious, I had not lost sight of the goal of my
dreams—some great fortune, a completion of myself. I
had no idea what form it would take. I only felt that life
would have to toss some very special luck at my feet—
perhaps it would be fame or love, perhaps a satisfaction
of my longing and an elevation of my being. I was like a
page who dreams of noble ladies, accolades, and
princely honors.

I thought J was on the verge of some momentous
happening. I did not know that everything I had so far
experienced was mere chance, that my life still lacked 2
deep individual melody of its own. I did not know yet

( 83



PETER CAMENZIND
that I suffered from a longing which neither love nor
fame can satisfy. Therefore I enjoyed my slight and
somewhat questionable success with all the exuberance
I could command. It felt good to be in the company of
intelligent people and to see their faces turn eagerly
and attentively to me when I spoke.

At times I was struck by the fervor with which these
souls longed for some form of redemption. Yet what
strange paths they were taking toward that goal.
Though belief in God was considered foolish, almost in
bad taste, people believed in names like Schopenhauer,
Buddha, Zarathustra, and many others. There were
young unknown poets who performed solemn rites be-
fore statues and paintings in fashionably furnished
apartments. They would have been ashamed to do so
before God, but they knelt down before the Zeus of
Otricoli. There were miserably dressed ascetics who
tortured themselves with abstinence: their god’s name
was either Buddha or Tolstoy. There were artists who,
by resorting to wallpaper in carefully selected color
schemes, to music, food, wines, perfumes, or cigars,
induced states of extraordinary and unusual excitement
in themselves. They discoursed easily and with affected
naturalness about musical lines, color congruences,
and similar matters and were always looking for the
“personal” touch, which generally consisted of some
small, harmless self-deception or quirk. Though I found

84 )



CHAPTER FOUR

this spectacle amusing and ridiculous, I sensed how
much deep-felt longing and genuine passion flared up
and was consumed thus.

Of all the fantastically dressed, fashionable poets,
artists, and philosophers whose acquaintance I made
during that time, I cannot think of one who has ac-
complished anything noteworthy. Among them there
was a north German my age, a pleasant little fellow, a
delicate and dear person who was sensitive to every-
thing artistic. He was considered one of the great poets
of the future, and I remember listening to him recite his
poems, which possessed an exceptionally fragrant,
soulful quality. He was the only one of us who might
have become a real poet. Later I heard by chance what
happened to him: having been intimidated by bad re-
views of one of his books, the hypersensitive poet with-
drew altogether and fell into the hands of a patron
who, instead of spurring him on, brought about his
complete ruin in a short time. He lived a vapid
aesthete’s existence at his patron’s villa with that man’s
nervous ladies and began to think of himself as a mis-
understood hero; sadly misled, he went about destroy-
ing his reason systematically with pre-Raphaelite
ecstasies and Chopin's music.

I realized the danger of frequenting this circle and
later came to think of this fledgling crew of eccentri-
cally dressed poets and beautiful souls with nothing but

( 85



PETER CAMENZIND
horror and pity. Well, my peasant nature luckily kept
me from falling prey to this circus.

Nobler and more rewarding than fame, wine, love,
and wisdom was friendship. It alone stirred me out of
my inborn sluggishness and kept my youth unspoiled
and as fresh as the dawn. Even today I know of nothing
more delicious than an honest and forthright friendship
between two men, and if something like homesickness
for my youth overcomes me during periods of reflec-
tion, I think back upon nothing with as much longing
as my student friendships.

Since my infatuation with Erminia, I had neglected
Richard. I did not even notice it at first, but after a few
weeks I began to feel guilty. I confessed everything to
him; he told me that he had seen misfortune coming
and pitied me. I renewed our bonds as unreservedly and
enviously as ever. What ease and agility in dealing with
people and life I acquired during that time I owe
entirely to him. He was handsome and glad in body and
soul, and life did not seem to have a darker side for
him. Though he was intelligent and worldly enough to
be aware of the passions and confusions of our time,
they passed over him without injuring him. His walk,
his speech, in fact his entire being, were supple, light-
hearted, and immensely likable.

However, he showed little appreciation of my liking
for wine. He would join me occasionally, but for the

86 )



CHAPTER FOUR

most part he had had his fill after two glasses and
regarded my far greater consumption with naive aston-
ishment. But when he noticed that I was suffering or
about to succumb to a fit of melancholy, he would play
music for me, read to me, or take me on walks. During
these small expeditions we were often as high-spirited
as little boys. Once, I remember, we lay in a wooded
valley at noontime, threw pine cones at each other, and
sang irreverent verses to pious tunes. The clear swift
stream splashed so cool and inviting that at length we
undressed and lay down in the cold water. Then it
occurred to Richard to do a pantomime. He sat down on
a mossy rock and played the Lorelei, while I drifted
past him like the boatman in his ship. He looked so
girlishly demure and made such faces that I, who was
to affect the deepest woe, had all I could do to contain
my laughter. Suddenly we heard voices. A group of
tourists appeared on the footpath and we had to hide
our nakedness quickly under a mound that jutted out
over the stream. As the blissfully ignorant troupe
passed us, Richard emitted a series of highly peculiar
noises, grunting, squeaking, and hissing in turn. The
people stopped dead in their tracks, turned around,
peered into the water, and were on the point of dis-
covering us when Richard popped out of his hiding
place, looked at the indignant troupe, and intoned with
a deep voice and priestly gesture: “Go your way in

( 87



PETER CAMENZIND
peace.” He ducked away immediately, pinched my
arm, and said: “That was an imitation too.”

“An imitation of what?”

“Pan frightens the herdsmen,” he answered, laugh-
ing. “Unfortunately there were a few women among
them.”

Though he took little notice of my historical studies,
he soon shared my infatuation with St. Francis of
Assisi. But he would make an occasional crack even
about him, which would make me furious. We imag-
ined the blessed sufferer wandering through the Um-
brian landscape, enthusiastic, like a big lovable child,
rejoicing in God and filled with humble love of all man-
kind. Together we read his immortal hymn to the sun
and knew it almost by heart. Once, as we were return-
ing from a steamboat excursion across the lake, the
evening breeze ruffling the golden water, Richard asked
softly: “How does our saint put it?”

And I quoted: “Laudato si, misignore, per frate vento
e per aere e nubilo e sereno et omne tempo!”

When we quarreled or insulted each other, it always
ended with Richard hurling such a profusion of amus-
ing nicknames at me that I was soon forced to laugh
and my anger lost its sting. The only time my friend
was even a little serious was when he played or listened
to a piece by one of his favorite composers. Yet even
such an event he would interrupt with a joke. Still, his
love of art was a pure and heartfelt devotion and his

88 )



CHAPTER FOUR
feeling for what was genuine and important seemed to
me infallible.

He had a wonderful knack for the delicate and fine
art of consoling, of sympathetic sharing and easing of
sorrow when one of his friends was in distress. If he
happened to find me in ill humor, he would amuse me
with innumerable anecdotes and his voice then had a
calming and cheering quality that I was able to resist
only rarely.

Richard showed a certain respect for me because I
was more serious than he; yet, my physique impressed
him far more. He boasted about it in front of friends
and was proud to have a friend who could have stran-
gled him with one hand. He set great store in physical
prowess and agility; he taught me tennis, rowed and
swam with me, took me horseback riding, and was not
satisfied until I piayed billiards as skillfully as he. It
was his favorite game, and he played it not only master-
fully but with artistry, and was always particularly
lively and witty at it.

His opinion of my writing did not exceed my own. He
once said to me: “Look, I always thought you were a
poet and I still think you are, not because you write for
the literary journals but because there is something
beautiful and deep alive in you that will break out
sooner or later, That will be genuine poetry.”

Meanwhile, the weeks slipped like thin coins through
our fingers, and the time was quite unexpectedly at

( 89



PETER CAMENZIND
hand when Richard had to think about returning home.
With slightly feigned high spirits we enjoyed the wan-
ing weeks and finally agreed that some festive under-
taking would have to precede our bitter leave-taking,
so that it would end on a cheerful and promising note.
I suggested a holiday in the Bernese Alps. Yet it was
only the beginning of spring, much too early for the
Alps. While I racked my brain for other suggestions,
Richard wrote his father, quietly preparing a great sur-
prise for me. One day he appeared with a formidable
check and invited me to accompany him as a guide
through northern Italy.

A dream I had harbored since youth was about to
come true. Feverishly I made my small preparations,
quickly taught my friend a few words of Italian, and
was apprenhensive to the last minute before our depar-
ture lest our plans come to nothing.

Our bags were sent ahead, we sat in a train carriage,
the green fields and hills flitted past, Lake Urner, the
Saint Gotthard pass, then the mountain hamlets and
brooks and boulder-strewn slopes and snow-capped
peaks of the Ticino, and then the first dark stone
houses on the more gently sloped vineyards, and the
journey full of expectation along the lakes and through
the fertile plains of Lombardy toward the lively, noisy,
strangely attractive yet repulsive Milan.

Richard had never tried to imagine what the Cathe-

go )



CHAPTER FOUR

dral of Milan might look like; he had only heard it men-
tioned as an architectural masterpiece. So it was a
delightful experience to watch his outraged disappoint-
ment. Once he had overcome the initial shock and re-
gained his sense of humor, he was the first to suggest
that we climb to the roof and make our way among the
confused array of gargoyles. We noted with some satis-
faction that the hundreds of statues of saints on the
small Gothic spires were of little consequence, at least
the more recent ones, which seemed to have been mass-
produced. For almost two hours we lay on our backs on
the sloping marble slabs, which had been warmed by
the April sun. Contentedly, Richard confessed: “You
know, I wouldn't really mind being disappointed again
the way I was here. During the entire trip I have been a
little afraid that all the treasures we would see would
overwhelm us. And now the whole thing has had such
a human and slightly ridiculous beginning.” Then the
confused assemblage of stone figures in whose midst
we were camping aroused the baroque streak in his
imagination.

“Presumably,” he said, “the most distinguished and
highest of the saints has his place right up there on the
choir tower. But because it cannot be an altogether de-
lightful experience to balance like an acrobat of stone
on this sharp little pinnacle for all time, it is only fair
that the topmost saint be relieved periodically and

€ gl



PETER CAMENZIND
moved up into heaven. Now just imagine what a spec-
tacle ensues when this happens, for all the other saints
have to move up one place according to their rank in
the hierarchy, each one having to leap onto his prede-
cessor’s perch, each one in a great rush and each
jealous of those who precede him.”

Whenever I visited Milan thereafter, I would remem-
ber that afternoon and with a melancholy smile en-
vision the hundreds of marble saints performing their
bold leaps.

Genoa, too, provided a rich reward. Shortly after
noon on a bright windy day, my arms resting on a
broad parapet, my back to the brightly colored city, I
beheld for the first time the swell of the great blue
flood, the sea. Tossing darkly with unfathomable yearn-
ing, eternal and immutable, it hurled itself toward me
and I sensed something within me fashioning a friend-
ship for life and in death with this foam-flecked surge.

The unlimited spaciousness of the horizon affected
me as deeply. Once again, as in childhood, I beheld the
soft blue of immeasurable distances beckoning to me
like an open gate. And the feeling swept over me that I
was not born for a normal life at home among my
people or in cities and houses, but my fate was to
wander through foreign regions and make odysseys on
the sea. Darkly, the old melancholy longing rose up in
me to throw myself on God's mercy and merge my own
pitifully insignificant life with the infinite and timeless.

92 )



CHAPTER FOUR

Near Rapallo I went swimming. For the first time I
wrestled with waves, tasted the salty tang and experi-
enced the might of the ocean. Around me nothing but
clear blue waves, brown-yellow rocks along the shore, a
deep calm sky, and the eternal great roar of the sea.
The sight of ships passing along the horizon affected
me anew each time: black masts and polished white
sails, or the small ribbon of smoke from a steamship
far away. Next to my favorites, the clouds, I know of
nothing more beautiful than a ship sailing at a great
distance, growing smaller and smaller, disappearing
finally into the horizon.

Then we reached Florence. The city displayed itself
to our eyes as I remembered it from hundreds of pic-
tures and a thousand premonitions—sunlit, spacious,
hospitable, traversed by a green stream with many
bridges, and girdled by sharply outlined hills. The bold
tower of the Palazzo Vecchio pointed defiantly into the
clear sky. Behind it, at the same height, lay beautiful
Fiesole, white and sun-drenched, and all the hills were
white and rose-red with the bloom of the fruit trees.
The carefree, harmless life of Tuscany opened itself to
me like a miracle and soon I felt more at home there
than I ever had anywhere else. We idled away our days
in churches, piazzas, in little side streets, loggias, and
marketplaces; in the evenings we lolled dreamily in
gardens on the hillsides, where the lemons were already
ripening, or in simple taverns that served Chianti,

( 93



PETER CAMENZIND
where we drank and talked. In between we spent richly
rewarding hours in the galleries and in the Bargello, in
cloisters, libraries, and sacristies; afternoons in Fiesole,
San Miniato, Settignano, Prato.

As we had previously agreed, I would now leave
Richard for a week by himself, and I had the noblest
and most delicious experience of my youth: wandering
through the rich green Umbrian hills. I trod the streets
St. Francis had walked, and often felt as though he
were walking beside me, full of unfathomable love,
joyously and thankfully greeting each bird and moun-
tain spring. I picked lemons and ate them on hills
glistening with sunlight, spent my nights in little vil-
lages, sang and composed poems within myself, and
celebrated Easter in Assisi, in the church of my saint.

I still fee] that those eight days I wandered through
Umbria were the crown and sunset of my youth. Each
day new sources welled up within me and I gazed onto
the clear and festive landscape as into the benign eyes
of God.

In Umbria I had devotedly traced the steps of St.
Francis, the musician of God; in Florence I had savored
the illusion of living in the quattrocento. Though I had
written satires on contemporary life, I did not realize
the ridiculous shabbiness of modern culture until I set
foot in Florence. In Florence I began to sense that I
would be a stranger in society for the rest of my life,
and the desire was born in me to lead my life outside

94 )



CHAPTER FOUR

this society, preferably in the south. I did not feel a
stranger among people here, and the ease and natural-
ness of life overjoyed me, especially since the tradition
of classical] culture and history ennobled and refined it.

The beautiful weeks slipped by in a marvelous series
of joyous experiences; never had I seen Richard so
enraptured. In our wanderings we came upon out-of-
the-way mountain villages basking in the sun, made
friends with innkeepers, monks, country girls, and
humble village priests; listened to naive village sere-
nades, fed pretty, brown-skinned children bread and
fruit, and gazed down on the glistening Ligurian sea
from the sunlit Tuscan hills. Both of us, certain that we
were worthy of our good fortune, looked forward to a
rich new life. Work, struggle, pleasure, and fame lay
within our reach, so we enjoyed our days with no sense
of urgency. Even our imminent separation seemed in-
consequential; for we knew with greater certainty than
ever before that we needed each other and could count
on each other for the rest of our lives.

That is the story of my youth. Upon reflection, it
seems as brief as a summer night. A little music, love,
and vainglory—yet it was beautiful and rich and color-
ful like an Eleusian feast.

And it was snuffed out as quickly and pathetically as
a candle in the wind.

Richard took leave of me in Zurich. I never saw him

( 95



PETER CAMENZIND

again. Two weeks later he drowned while bathing in a
ridiculously small river in southern Germany. I did not
attend the funeral, for I learned of his death a few days
after he was buried. Then I threw myself on the floor of
my little room blaspheming God and life with horrible,
vile curses, cried, and went mad. J had not realized
until then that my friendship was my sole possession.
Now it was gone.

I could not bear to stay in a town where each step I
took filled me with a host of memories that seemed to
choke me. It was all the same to me what happened
now; I was sick to the core of my soul and had a dread
of everything alive. And I had few expectations that my
harrowed being would right itself and drive coura-
geously with newly hoisted sails into a time of manhood
that promised to be even harsher. God had decreed that
I was to offer the best part of myself to a pure and
joyous friendship. Like two swiftly moving skiffs, we
had stormed forward together, and Richard’s skiff was
the colorful, fragile, happy, and loved one, to which my
eye clung and which I trusted to bear me along toward
beautiful destinies. Now it had sunk with no more than
a brief cry, leaving me rudderless and adrift on waters
that had suddenly darkened.

It would be my task now to withstand this hard test
and, setting my course by the stars, to set out on a new
journey for the crown of life—with the chance of

96 )



CHAPTER FOUR

losing my way once more. I had believed in friendship,
in the love of women, and in youth. Now that one after
the other had left me, why did I not put my trust in
God? But all my life I have been as timid and obstinate
as a child, always confident that real life would come
like a storm and overwhelm me. It would make me
wise and rich, then bear me on its huge wings toward
a ripe fortune.

Wise and frugal, life remained silent, however, and
let me drift. It sent me neither storms nor stars but
waited so that I would become aware of my insignifi-
cance again and in patience lose my obstinacy. It let me
perform my little comedy of pride and knowledge, ig-
noring this as it waited for the lost child to find his way
back to his mother.

( 97





Chapter Five

i NOW COME to a period in my life apparently more
lively and colorful than earlier periods, one which
would provide me with the material for a slight but
fashionable novel. I could tell how I became the editor
of a German newspaper, how I allowed too great a
freedom to my pen and malicious tongue and suffered
the consequences; how I became a notorious drinker,
finally resigned my position after much unpleasant-
ness, and managed to have myself assigned to Paris
as a special correspondent; how I lived wildly, wasting
my time in that corrupt place, and got involved in all
kinds of scrapes.

If I skip this interlude and deprive those of my
readers with a taste for the sordid of the intimate
details, it isn’t because I’m afraid. I admit I entered one
dead-end street after the other, saw all sorts of vile
things, and became involved in them. The attraction of
la vie bohéme lost all its appeal and you must allow me
to concentrate on what is pure and good and leave
those wasted, rejected years behind me.

One evening as I sat in the Bois de Boulogne, won-
dering whether to have done with Paris or even with

€ 99



PETER CAMENZIND
life itself, I reviewed my entire existence for the first
time in years and reached the conclusion that I had
little to lose by suicide.

All at once I imagined that day long since past—an
early summer morning in the mountains as I knelt at
the side of the bed on which my mother lay dying. Not
having been able to think of that morning for so long
startled me with shame and the stupid impulse to
commit suicide disappeared. For I believe that no one,
unless foolish or mad, is capable of taking his own life
if he has witnessed the end of another person’s good
life. Once again I saw my mother dying, watched the
sober labor of death on her face, ennobling it. Death ap-
peared harsh yet as strong and as kind as a father who
fetches a lost child.

Now I realized that death is our wise and good
brother who knows the right hour and on whom we can
depend. I began to understand that suffering and dis-
appointments and melancholy are there not to vex us or
cheapen us or deprive us of our dignity but to mature
and transfigure us.

A week later my trunks were packed and on their way
to Basel. I set off on foot, covering large stretches of
southern France; with each day I walked, my ungodly
Paris period, pursuing me in memory like a stench,
turned more and more into a fog and blew away. |
followed a cour damour, spent my nights in castles,

100 )



CHAPTER FIVE
mills, or barns, and drank southern wines in the com-
pany of dark and loquacious country folk.

Unkempt, lean, sunburned, and inwardly changed I
arrived in Basel two months later. This was my first
great trip on foot, the first of many. For there are few
places between Locarno and Verona, between Basel and
Brig, Florence and Perugia, that my dusty boots have
not traversed twice or three times—in pursuit of
dreams, none of which has yet been fulfilled.

In Basel I rented a run-down apartment outside
town, unpacked my things, and set to work. I was glad I
lived in a quiet town where no one knew who I was. I
had kept up my connections with some newspapers and
journals and had sufficient work to keep me alive. The
first few weeks were good, but gradually my melan-
choly returned, staying with me for days and weeks on
end, and would not leave even when I worked. Those
who have never felt this melancholy will not under-
stand what I mean. How should I describe it? I was
enveloped by a sensation of ghastly loneliness. Between
myself and people and life in the city, plazas, houses,
and streets, a wide cleavage existed at all times. There
would be an accident, newspaper headlines—none of it
mattered to me. There were fetes, funerals, fairs, con-
certs—to what purpose? Why? I ran out of my room,
roamed forests, mountains, and highways. The
meadows, trees, and fields were silent. They looked at

( I01



PETER CAMENZIND
me with mute entreaty, sought to communicate, to be
obliging, to greet me. But they stood there unable to say
anything, while I understood their suffering and
suffered with them because I could not redeem them.

I went to see a doctor, brought a record of my ail-
ments, and tried to describe my suffering to him. He
read my notes, questioned me, and then examined me.

“I envy you your good health,” he said. “There's
nothing wrong with you physically. Try to cheer your-
self up with books and music.”

“I read new books every day. It happens to be part of
my job.”

“In any case, you ought to get out in the open more
often.”

“I take three- or four-hour walks each day, and when
I'm on holiday I walk twice that much.”

“Then you should force yourself to be with other
people. You're in danger of becoming a recluse.”

“What does that matter?”

“It matters a great deal. The less you tend to seek out
other people, the more you should force yourself to.
Your condition can’t yet be diagnosed as an illness. It
does not seem serious to me, but if you don’t lead a
more active social life, you might lose your equilibrium
one of these days.”

The doctor was a sympathetic, well-intentioned man.
He felt sorry for me. He introduced me to a scholar

102 )



CHAPTER FIVE

whose house was the center of many gatherings and of
a certain literary and intellectual life. I went there.
People knew my name, they were friendly, almost kind,
and I began to frequent the house.

Once I went on a cold evening in Jate fall. A young
historian and a slim, dark-haired girl were there; no
one else. The girl served tea, did the talking, and was
snide toward the historian. Afterward she played the
piano. Then she told me she had read my satirical
pieces but had not enjoyed them. She seemed clever, too
clever, and I scon went home.

Eventually people found out that I spent much of my
time in bars, that actually I was a drunkard. It hardly
surprised me that they should have made this discov-
ery, for rumors flourish readily in academic circles. Yet
this shameful piece of information had no untoward
effect on my visits. In fact it made me more desirable,
for temperance happened to be the rage and most of
the ladies and gentlemen belonged to one of several
temperance societies. They rejoiced over each sinner
who fell into their clutches. One day, the first polite
attack was launched against my habit. The disgrace of
frequenting bars, the curse of alcoholism—all this
viewed from the hygienic, ethical, and social stand-
point—were impressed on me in no uncertain terms
and I was asked to attend one of the temperance-society
evenings. I was startled. I had only a faint notion of the

( 103



PETER CAMENZIND
existence of these clubs and their endeavors. The meet-
ing, with its music and religious overtones, struck me
as painfully comic and I made no attempt to conceal
my feelings. For weeks afterward I was importuned—
in the friendliest possible manner, to be sure—until the
subject began to bore me. One evening, when the same
routine started all over again—all of them sincerely
hoping for my conversion—I got desperate and insisted
that they spare me this gibberish from now on. The
dark, slim girl was present, listened attentively to me,
and applauded at the end. But I was too annoyed to pay
attention to her.

Once I was delighted to witness a slightly humorous
incident that followed an important temperance rally.
The society members and guests had dined at head-
quarters; there were speeches, friendships were struck
up, hymns were sung, and the progress of the great
cause was celebrated with much hue and cry, but one
of the ushers who served as banner-bearer found the
alcohol-free speeches too tedious and sneaked off to a
nearby tavern. When the solemn demonstration started
through the streets, the reprobates lining the sidewalks
had a delightful spectacle to jeer at: a gaily inebriated
leader at the head of the enthusiastic assemblage, the
flag with the blue cross swaying in his arms like the
mast of a foundering ship.

Though the drunken usher was whisked away, the

104 )



CHAPTER FIVE

mass of petty vanities, jealousies, and intrigues flour-
ishing between the various competing clubs and com-
missions remained. The movement split. A few overly
ambitious members claimed all credit for themselves
and would loudly curse every drunken reprobate not
reclaimed in their name. Many noble and selfless co-
workers were callously exploited, and those with an
inside view of these affairs saw how easily human
frailties could thrive under the cover of idealism. I
heard about these incidents through secondhand
sources and derived a quiet satisfaction from them. On
many occasions, returning from one of my nightly
bouts, I told myself that, wild as we were, we drunkards
were better and more honest persons than the re-
formers.

In my little room with its unhampered view of the
Rhine, I studied and pondered at great length. I was
disconsolate that life seemed to pass me by, that no
strong current took hold of me, no great passion in-
flamed me or pulled me out of this stupefying trance.
Besides my regular work, I was preparing a book on the
lives of the early Minorites, yet this was not creative
work but a patient and modest assembling of informa-
tion. It did not satisfy my longing.

Reflecting on the time I had spent in Zurich and
Paris, I tried to clarify for myself the real desires,
passions, and ideals of my contemporaries. One of

( 105



PETER CAMENZIND
them had set himself the task of persuading people to
discard outmoded furniture, wallpaper, and fashions,
introducing them to freer and more beautiful surround-
ings; another devoted his efforts to popularizing
Haeckel’s monism. Others strove for universal peace.
Still another acquaintance was fighting for the impov-
erished lower classes, and another collected funds and
lectured in behalf of building theaters and museums for
the public. And here in Basel people combated alcohol-
ism.

All these endeavors were imbued with vigor and
movement; yet none of them mattered to me. It would
have made no difference to me or the kind of life I led if
any or all of these objectives had been achieved. Un-
happy, I sank back into my chair, pushed papers and
books away, and reflected. I could hear the Rhine
surging past and the wind rustling. I listened intently to
this great melancholy language that seemed to suffuse
everything with sadness and longing. I saw pale clouds
swoop like frightened birds through the night sky,
heard the Rhine coursing, and thought of my mother’s
death, of St. Francis, of my homeland and the snow-
capped mountains, and of my friend Richard, who had
drowned. I saw myself scaling precipices to pick “AI-
pine roses” for Rosi Girtanner, animated by music and
conversation in Zurich, rowing with Erminia Aglietti
in the evening; I saw myself despairing over Richard’s

106 )



CHAPTER FIVE
death, voyaging and returning, convalescing and be-
coming miserable once more. To what purpose? Why?
Oh, God, had all of it been a mere game, mere chance,
a mirage? Hadn't I struggled and suffered agonies for
friendship and beauty and truth? Did not the wave of
longing and love still well up fiercely within me?

Then I would be all set to go out and drink. I blew
out my lamp, groped my way down the steep, winding
staircase, and went into one of the wine-halls. Being a
steady customer, I was received with respect, though I
was usually cantankerous and sometimes unspeakably
rude. I read the satirical magazine Simplicissimus,
which never failed to infuriate me, drank my wine, and
waited for it to soothe me. When the kind god touched
me with his gentle hands, my limbs would become
pleasantly weary and my soul would enter the land of
dreams.

At times it surprised me that I treated people so
boorishly and derived pleasure from snapping at them.
The waitresses at wine-halls I frequented feared me
and cursed me as a roughneck for always finding fault
with them. When I happened to enter into conversation
with the other guests, I was rude or mocked them, and
naturally they replied in kind. Still, I managed to latch
on to several drinking companions, all of them aging,
incurable alcoholics. We spent some evenings on fairly
tolerable terms. Among them was an old ruffian, de-

( 107



PETER CAMENZIND
signer by trade, a misogynist and foul-mouthed drunk
of the first order. If I happened on him in some tavern,
a night-long bout of drinking invariably ensued. We
would start by bantering jokes back and forth, slowly
finishing our first bottle of red wine. Drinking as such
gradually began to predominate, and the conversation
petered out. We sat facing each other, quietly drawing
on our cigars, emptying our respective bottles. We were
evenly matched, refilled our bottles at the same time,
and watched each other drink, half respectfully, half
with malicious glee. At grape-harvest time in the late
fall we once hiked through some vine-growing villages
in the Markgraferland and at the Stag in Kirchen the
old buzzard told me his life’s story. I only remember
that it was interesting and unusual; I've forgotten all
the details.

One thing I do remember is his description of a
drinking bout in the later part of his life. He was out in
the country somewhere at a village festival, and being
seated at the table of honor, he toasted the pastor and
mayor so often that they became drunk very quickly.
The pastor, however, had to give a speech. After much
effort was exerted to maneuver him onto the platform,
he made a number of outrageous statements and was
bundled off in disgrace, whereupon the mayor tried to
fill the breach. He held forth in a bold and impressive
manner at first, but the suddenness of the event had

108 )



CHAPTER FIVE
made him unwell and his impromptu speech ended in
an unusual and indelicate manner.

I would gladly have heard this story and others re-
peated by my drinking companion, but as a result of a
quarrel at a shooting match, we became irreconcilable
enemies. Now both of us sat in the same tavern, each
at his own table, as enemies. But out of habit we
watched each other, drank at the same rate, and sat
there until, the last guests, we were finally asked to
move on. We were never friends again.

The interminable probing of the causes of my mel-
ancholy and my inability to cope with life was fruitless
and wearying. Still I did not feel worn out or exhausted
but full of dark urges, convinced that I would yet suc-
ceed in creating something deep and good, in snatching
a bit of luck from life. But would this lucky moment
ever come? I thought with bitterness of those high-
strung modern artists who drove themselves to the
pitch of artistic creation with the help of artificial stim-
ulants, whereas I allowed my resources to lie untapped
within me. I tried to analyze what kind of block or
demon was constraining my soul within this vigorous
body. Too, I was possessed by the notion that I was
someone unusual, someone whom life had mistreated
and whose suffering was unknown to anyone, who was
misunderstood.

The diabolical thing about melancholy is not that it

( 109



PETER CAMENZIND
makes you ill but that it makes you conceited and
shortsighted; yes, almost arrogant. You lapse into bad
taste, thinking of yourself as Heine’s Atlas, whose
shoulders support all the world’s puzzles and agonies,
as if thousands, lost in the same maze, did not endure
the same agonies. In my state of isolation and estrange-
ment I too failed to realize that the traits and peculiari-
ties of character I took to be exclusively mine were in
fact part of my family’s heritage, my family’s affliction,
and proper to all Camenzinds.

Every few weeks I would drop in at the home of my
hospitable scholar friend. Gradually I became ac-
quainted with most of the people who went there; there
were many young academicians, quite a few of them
German, who worked in a wide variety of fields; a few
painters and musicians, as well as some ordinary citi-
zens, who brought their wives. Often I would gaze at
these people with a kind of astonishment. I knew that
they saw one another several times a week, and I did
not understand how they could have anything left to
say to each other. The majority of them were stereo-
typed examples of homo socialis and all of them
seemed to have some affinity with one another, sharing
a gregariousness and superficiality that I alone lacked.
Among them were quite a few fine and distinguished
people whose vigor and presence of mind seemed to be
not at all, or only slightly, diminished by this constant

110 )



CHAPTER FIVE

socializing. I was only able to talk to one person at a
time. Rushing from one to the other, stopping only for
a brief moment, making a stab at complimenting one of
the ladies while attending to a cup of tea, two conver-
sations, and the piano playing, all at one and the same
time, with a look of animated amusement—that I could
not do. Worst of all was when I was forced to speak
about literature and art. I observed that precious little
thought was given to these subjects and that they only
provided occasion for much lying and gabbing.

I lied along as well as I could, but it gave me no
pleasure and I found this chitchat boring and humiliat-
ing. I much preferred to listen to a woman talking
about her children or to tell about my trips or little
things that had happened to me during the day or to
talk about actual events. At these moments I could be
almost friendly and glad. After one of these evenings,
however, I usually stopped by a wine-hall and slaked
my parched throat, drowning my unspeakable boredom
in draughts of wine.

At one of these gatherings I saw the dark-haired girl
again. There were many people present; there was
music, and the chatter grew as loud and insufferable as
usual. I was sitting in an out-of-the-way corner with a
portfolio of sketches of Tuscany on my knees. These
were not the usual hackneyed little sketches of the
obvious sights; they were more intimate: landscapes

( 111



PETER CAMENZIND

sketched by traveling companions and friends who had
given them to my host. I even discovered among them a
drawing of a small stone house with narrow windows in
the isolated valley of San Clemente, a house I recog-
nized because I had taken many walks in that region.
The valley lies close to Fiesole, but most tourists never
set foot there because it is virtually devoid of antiqui-
ties. It is a valley of severe yet remarkable beauty, arid
and almost uninhabited, hemmed in by stark, bare
mountains; remote, melancholy, pristine.

The girl stepped up to me and looked over my
shoulder.

“Why do you spend so much time by yourself, Herr
Camenzind?”

I was annoyed. She feels neglected by the other men,
I thought, and now she comes to me.

“Well, won’t you give me an answer?”

“Excuse me. But what am I supposed to answer? I sit
by myself because that’s the way 1 like it.”

“Am I disturbing you then?”

“You're amusing.”

“Thanks, the feeling is mutual.” And she sat down. I
made no attempt to put the portfolio away.

“You're from the mountain country, aren’t you?” she
asked. “I wonder if you could describe it to me. My
brother tells me no one but Camenzinds live in your
village. Is that true?”

112 )



CHAPTER FIVE

“Practically,” I muttered. “There’s Fiissli the baker,
and there’s an innkeeper by the name of Nydegger.”

“And the rest are all Camenzinds? Are they all
related?”

“More or less.”

I handed her a sketch. She held the sheet in such a
way that I saw she knew how something like that
should be handled, and I told her as much.

“You praise me, but like a teacher.” She laughed.

“Don’t you want to look at the sketch?” I asked
brusquely. “If not, I can put it back with the others.”

“What is it of?”

“San Clemente.”

“Where?”

“Near Fiesole.”

“Have you been there?”

“Yes, a few times.”

“What does the valley look like? This doesn’t give you
much of an idea.”

I thought for a moment. The stark yet beautiful
landscape came into view and I half closed my eyes to
hold on to the image. It was a little while before I spoke
again, and I was pleased that she had not interrupted
me. She seemed to realize that I was meditating.

Then I described San Clemente as it lies parched and
immense, bearing the brunt of the sun on a summer
afternoon. In nearby Fiesole there is industry; people

( 113



PETER CAMENZIND
weave straw hats and baskets, or hawk souvenirs and
oranges, or cheat tourists or beg from them. Florence,
where the old and the new mingle, lies even farther
down the valley. But Fiesole and Florence are out of
sight of San Clemente. No painter has worked there, no
Roman monument was erected there; human history
passed this desolate valley by. Only the sun and rain do
battle with the earth there, crooked pine trees maintain
a precarious existence, and with their lean tops the few
cypresses feel the air for oncoming storms that will
cut short the miserable lives to which their parched
roots cling. Occasionally an oxcart from a neighboring
dairy farm will come by, or a farmer and his family will
wander past on their way to Fiesole, but these are
chance visitors, and the red skirts the farm women
wear, which seem so smartly gay elsewhere, are out
of place in San Clemente, so you don’t mind leaving
them out of the picture.

I told her how I had hiked through the valley with a
friend, had rested at the feet of cypress trees and leaned
against their slender trunks; and how the sad and
beautiful magic of the strange, lonely valley had re-
minded me of the valleys at home.

Then we were both silent.

“You are a poet,” said the girl after a moment.

I made a face.

“I don’t mean it that way,” she went on. “Not because

114 )



CHAPTER FIVE
you write stories, but because you understand and love
nature. It doesn’t matter to most people that the wind
sings in the trees or that a mountain shimmers in the
sunlight. But you find life in all this, a life you can
partake of.”

I replied that no one understood nature and that all
searching and all desire to comprehend really compli-
cated matters more and made one melancholy. A tree
bathed in sunlight, a weathered stone, an animal, a
mountain, each has life, has a tale to tell, is alive,
suffers, endures, experiences joy, dies—but we don’t
understand it.

As I talked, soothed by her patience and attentive-
ness, I looked at her more closely. Her gaze was fixed
on my face, her expression calm and rapt with interest
as though she were a child—or, rather, like an adult
who forgets himself entirely while listening and whose
eyes, unselfconsciously, again become those of a child.
And as I observed her, little by little I realized, with the
naive joy of revelation, that she was very beautiful.

When I ceased speaking, she too was silent. Then, as
if startled by something, she squinted into the lamp-
light.

“I don’t know your name, you know,” I said suddenly.

“Elizabeth.”

She left me and soon afterwards was asked to play
the piano. She played well. But when I joined the group

( 115



PETER CAMENZIND

at the piano I noticed she was no longer quite as
beautiful.

As I walked down the comfortably old-fashioned
staircase, I overheard a snatch of conversation between
two painters who were putting on their coats in the
hall.

“At least he had a good time flirting with Elizabeth,”
one of them said, laughing.

“Still waters . . .” said the other. “He didn’t pick the
worst one either.”

So those fools were already gabbing. It occurred to
me that I had confided the most intimate thoughts and
a good portion of my memories to this young girl, con-
fided in her almost against my will. What had made me
doit? And they were already talking, the bastards.

I went away and avoided the house for several
months. By chance, one of those two painters was the
first to broach the subject when I met him in the street.

“Why aren’t you coming to the house any more?”

“Because I’m sick of their damned gossip!”

“Oh, yes, those women!” he laughed.

“No,” I retorted. “I mean the men, our artist friends
in particular.”

During these months I saw Elizabeth only a few
times on the street, once in a shop and once in the art
museum. Usually she looked pretty, never beautiful.
There was something unusual about the movement of

116 )



CHAPTER FIVE

her overly slim body, which, though generally it suited
her, could also seem exaggerated or artificial. But that
time in the museum, she was beautiful—beautiful be-
yond words. She did not notice me sitting on the side
leafing through the catalogue; she was standing nearby,
completely absorbed in a large Segantini. The painting
depicted several farm girls working on sparse mea-
dows, in the background jagged mountains which re-
minded me of the Stockhorn range, and above it all, in
a cool, transparent sky, an exceedingly well-rendered
ivory cloud. It made you reel when you set eyes on
it: from its knotted, involuted mass you could see that
the wind had just packed and kneaded it; the cloud was
about to soar and drift away. Elizabeth had grasped
this and yielded to it completely. And her soul, usually
veiled, once more revealed its inner face, laughed softly
out of wide-open eyes, made her small mouth childishly
soft, and smoothed out the clever, severe fold between
her brows. The beauty and genuineness of a great work
of art made her soul display its own beauty and truth.

I sat quietly to the side, contemplating the beautiful
Segantini cloud and the lovely girl under its spell. Then
I became afraid that she would turn around and want
to talk to me and lose her beauty again, so quickly and
silently I left the room.

At this time I began again to delight in nature, and
my attitude toward it underwent a change. Time and

( 117



PETER CAMENZIND
time again I roamed through the magnificent country
surrounding the town, mainly into the Jura, which I
liked best of all. Whenever I saw these woods, moun-
tains, meadows, and orchards, I sensed that they stood
there waiting for something. Perhaps for me, but cer-
tainly for love.

And so I began to love all these things. An over-
powering longing within me responded to their silent
beauty and, within myself as well, there arose the
yearning to be conscious, understood, and loved.

Many people say they “love nature,” by which they
mean they don’t dislike the charms nature displays be-
fore them. They go on outings, delight in the beauty of
the earth as they trample meadows and tear off flowers
and sprigs, only to discard them or let them wilt at
home. That is how they love nature. This love over-
comes them on Sundays when the weather is fine and
they are moved by the goodness of their hearts. Ac-
tually they have no need for such feelings, for isn’t man
“the crowning glory of nature”? Yes, of course, the
crown!

So I peered more and more greedily into the abyss of
things. I listened to the wind sing in the trees, listened
to brooks roar through gorges and gentle streams glide
through the plains, and I knew these sounds were the
language of God: if I understood their dark, archaic,
beautiful language, it would be the rediscovery of para-

118 )



CHAPTER FIVE

dise. Books make little mention of this. It is the Bible
that contains the wonderful expression “the groaning
and travailing of creation.” Yet I felt that men through
the ages had been overwhelmed by the ineffable in life,
had abandoned their daily tasks and fled into seclusion
to hearken to the song of creation, to contemplate the
fleeting clouds, restlessly and longingly as hermits,
penitents, and saints to implore the Eternal.

Have you ever been in Pisa, in the Camposanto? Its
walls are covered with the faded frescoes of past cen-
turies, one of them depicting the life of hermits in the
Theban desert. Despite its faded colors, the naive pic-
ture exudes such bliss and peace that grief suddenly
overwhelms you and you long to weep away your sins
and wickedness in some remote and holy place, never
to return. Innumerable artists have sought thus to ex-
press their homesickness—in marvelous paintings. Any
one of Ludwig Richter’s affectionate paintings of chil-
dren sings the same song as the frescoes in Pisa.

Why did Titian, who loved the present and the phy-
sical, endow some of his lucidly representational paint-
ings with a background of tenderest blue? Just one
brushstroke of warm, deep blue. Whether it manifests
distant mountains or limitless space, one cannot tell.
Titian the realist did not himself know. He did not do it
for reasons of color harmony, as the art historians
would have it. It was his tribute to the ineffable, which

( 119



PETER CAMENZIND
was deeply alive in the soul of even this happy, light-
hearted man. Art, it seemed to me, had sought in all
ages to provide a language for the mute longing of the
divine within us.

St. Francis expressed this more beautifully and com-
pletely, yet in a more childlike way. Only now did I
really understand him. By encompassing the love of
earth, plants, stars, animals, storms, and seas in his
love of God, he superseded the Middle Ages, even
Dante, to discover the language of the eternally human.
He calls all creation and natura] phenomena his dear
brothers and sisters. Later in life, when the doctors
ordered that he have his forehead seared by a red-hot
iron, he greeted the terrible instrument as his “dear
brother, the fire,” despite his dread of pain.

As I learned to love nature as if it were a person, to
listen to it as if to a comrade or traveling companion
speaking a foreign tongue, my melancholy, though not
cured, was ennobled and cleansed. My eyes and ears
were sharpened, I learned to grasp nuances of tone and
subtleties of distinction. I longed to put my ear nearer
and nearer to the heartbeat of every living thing, so as
to understand perhaps, perhaps one day be granted the
gift of expressing this heartbeat in poetry which others
would awaken to. This pulse would send them to the
springs of all rejuvenation and purification. But this
was only a fervent wish, adream . . . I did not know

120 )



CHAPTER FIVE

whether it would be fulfilled and concentrated on what
was close to hand: I offered my love to every visible
thing and set myself to regard nothing with indiffer-
ence or contempt.

It is impossible to express the revitalizing, soothing
effect this had on my somber life. Nothing is nobler or
more joyful than an unspoken, constant, dispassionate
love, and if I have a heartfelt wish, it is that a few, or
even one or two, of my readers be brought to learn this
pure and blessed art. Some are born knowing this love
and practice it unawares throughout their lives—these
are God’s favorites, the good children among men.
Some learn it at the expense of great suffering, which is
evident if you have ever noticed the resolute, quiet,
glowing eyes of some cripples or victims of misfortune.
If you don’t care to listen to me and my poor words,
visit those who have overcome and transfigured their
suffering through dispassionate love.

I myself am still pitifully far from achieving this
state of perfection that I have venerated in many who
have suffered. Throughout the years I rarely lacked the
consoling belief that I knew the right path. Yet it would
be false to say that I never strayed from it, for I rested
whenever I could and was not spared many a wrong
turn. Two selfish tendencies warred within me against
genuine love. I was a drunkard and I was unsociable.
Though I cut down considerably on my intake of wine,

( 121



PETER CAMENZIND

I would still surrender completely every few weeks to
the guile of the god of the vine leaves. Yet it was only
rarely that I would spend the night in some drunken
escapade or sprawled out on the street—the god of wine
loves me and tempts me to drink only when his spirit
and mine enter into friendly dialogue. Nonetheless, I
would feel guilty for a long stretch after one of my
bouts. But, of all things, I could not give up my love of
wine, for I had inherited too strong a bent from my
father. For years I had fostered this legacy with care
and piety, and made it thoroughly my own. So I helped
myself out of this predicament by entering into a half-
serious, half-mocking pact. My Franciscan song of
praise from now on included “my dear brother, wine.”

I22 )



Chapter Six

ANOTHER WEAKNESS OF MINE was even more
troublesome: I disliked people generally, and
lived as a recluse, inclined to greet any human touch
with mockery or disdain.

When I first resolved to lead a new life I did not give
this much thought; it seemed proper to leave other
people to fend for themselves and to reserve all my
tenderness, devotion, and sympathy for mute nature.
At night, before going to bed, I would suddenly remem-
ber a hill, the edge of a wood, some favorite solitary tree
that I had neglected for a long time. Now it stood in the
night wind, dreaming, slumbering perhaps, sighing, its
branches trembling. What did it really look like at this
very moment? I would leave the house, find the tree,
and peer at its indistinct shape in the darkness. | re-
garded it with astonished tenderness, carrying its dusky
image back home with me.

You'll smile. This love may have been mistaken, yet
it was not wasted. The only question was how I would
find my way from a love of nature to love of mankind.

Well, once you’ve made a beginning, the rest always
follows on its own. The idea of my great poetic creation

( 123



PETER CAMENZIND
hovered before my mind’s eye; it seemed even more
possible than before. And what if my love of nature
should enable me to speak the language of woods and
streams—for whom would I be doing this? Not solely
for those I was fondest of, but really for the sake of a
mankind I wanted to lead toward love, even teach to
love. Yet with most people I was uncouth, scornful, and
unloving. I felt this split within myself and knew I must
struggle against unfriendliness. This was difficult be-
cause my isolation and personal circumstances made
me harsh and mean, especially in social relations. It
was not enough to be a little less severe at home or at
the tavern, or occasionally to greet a passer-by on the
street. Besides, as soon as I tried this I realized how
thoroughly my relationships with people had deterior-
ated: even when my gestures were not hostile, they
were greeted with coolness or suspicion—people
thought I was mocking them. The worst of it was that
for over a year I had avoided the home of the scholar,
my only real acquaintance. I realized I would have to
call there first if I wanted to have an entree into social
life as lived in this town.

It was ironic that the milk of human kindness, which
I despised so thoroughly, finally helped me in this
endeavor. As soon as I thought of the scholar’s house, a
picture of Elizabeth came to my mind, as beautiful as
she had looked standing before the Segantini cloud. I
realized what a large role she had played in my longing

124 )



CHAPTER SIX

and melancholy. For the first time in my life I gave
serious thought to marriage. Until now I had been so
convinced of my complete unsuitability for married life
that I had capitulated to this fact with feelings of
caustic self-derision. I was a poet, wanderer, drunk-
ard, lone wolf! Now I felt that my destiny was taking
shape as a love match linking me to humanity. It all
seemed so tempting and certain! Elizabeth, I had
noticed, was receptive to me, and she was a noble
person. I remembered how vivid her beauty was when I
had told her about San Clemente and when she had
stood in front of the Segantini. Over the years I had
gathered a great treasure from nature and art which
would enable me to reveal to her what was beautiful in
all things; I would surround her with everything true
and beautiful. Her face and her soul would shed all
their sadness and unfold all their potentialities.

Oddly enough, I was completely unaware of the
comic aspect of my sudden transformation. I, a recluse
who went wholly his own way, overnight had turned
into an infatuated fool who dreamed of married bliss
and setting up house.

At the first opportunity I called at the house that had
always treated me so hospitably, and I was now re-
ceived with the friendliest of reproaches. I went several
times in rapid succession and eventually saw Elizabeth
again. Truly, she was beautiful! She looked just as I
imagined she would look as my mistress: beautiful and

( 125



PETER CAMENZIND
happy. And for a while I just basked in the beauty of
her presence. She greeted me in a kindly manner, even
affectionately, and with a certain air of intimate friend-
liness that delighted me.

Do you remember the evening on the lake in the
boat, the evening decked out with Japanese lanterns
and music, when my declaration of love was nipped
in the bud? That had been the pathetic story of a boy
in love.

Even more pathetic and sad is the story of Peter
Camenzind as a man in love.

Someone mentioned in passing that Elizabeth had
just become engaged. I congratulated her, and made
the acquaintance of her fiancé when he came to take
her home. I congratulated him too. Throughout the
evening I wore a smile of benign good will, as irksome
to me as a mask. Afterward I did not dash off to the
woods or a tavern but sat down on my bed and watched
the lamp until it began to smoke and went out. I sat
stunned and crushed until finally I came to again. Then
grief and despair spread their black wings over me once
more and I lay there small and weak and sobbed like a
boy.

Whereupon I packed my rucksack, went to the sta-
tion, and took the morning train home. I felt like
climbing mountains again. I wanted to revisit my child-
hood and find out whether my father was still alive.

We had grown apart. Father's hair had turned com-

126 )



CHAPTER SIX

pletely gray; he no longer carried himself upright and
no longer looked very imposing. He treated me shyly,
asked no questions, wanted me to take his bed, and
seemed embarrassed as well as surprised at my visit. He
still owned the little house but had sold the meadows
and cattle. He received a small annuity and did a few
odd jobs here and there.

After he left the room, I went to the spot where my
mother’s bed had stood and the past flowed by me like a
broad calm stream. No longer an adolescent, I thought
how swiftly the years would follow each other from
now on and how soon I too would be a bent, gray man,
ready to lie down and die a bitter death. In the old,
shabby room, almost unchanged since I had lived there
as a boy and learned my Latin and witnessed my
mother’s death, these thoughts seemed so natural they
actually calmed me. Gratefully I remembered the abun-
dance of my youth. A stanza of Lorenzo de Medici’s that
I had learned in Florence came to mind:

Quant é bella giovenezza,
Ma si fugge tuttavia.

Chi vuol esser lieto, sia:

Di doman non c’é certezza.

Simultaneously I was surprised to find myself bring-
ing memories from Italy, from history, and from the
realm of learning into this old and familiar room.

( 127



PETER CAMENZIND

I gave my father some money and in the evening we
went to the inn. Everything appeared to be just as it
was the last evening we had spent there, except that I
paid for the wine. When my father boasted about
champagne and described the wine that produced a
star-shaped foam, he cited me as his authority and ac-
knowledged that my capacity for drink was now greater
than his. I inquired about the wizened peasant over
whose bald pate I had poured wine the last time I'd
been in the inn, he who had been so full of tricks. I
learned he had died long ago and even his jokes had
been forgotten. I drank Vaud wine, listened in on the
conversations, and told a few stories myself. When I
walked home with my father in the moonlight and he
continued rambling and gesticulating in his intoxica-
tion, I felt a peculiar enchantment I had never felt be-
fore. Images from the past pressed upon me—Uncle
Konrad, Rési Girtanner, my mother, Richard, and
Erminia. They seemed to me like a picture book whose
content surprises you because everything is so beautiful
and well made, whereas in reality it was not half so
lovely. How fast everything had rushed past me into
forgetfulness! Yet it was now engraved clearly and
distinctly within me:—half a lifetime that my memory
had stored without conscious effort on my part.

Only after we were home and my father finally
quieted down and fell asleep did I think of Elizabeth. It

128 )



CHAPTER SIX

had been yesterday that she greeted me and I admired
her and congratulated her fiancé. So much seemed to
have happened since then—my grief awoke and min-
gled with the flood of memories to beat against my
selfish and ill-protected heart like the Fohn against a
trembling and fragile Alpine hut. I could not bear to
stay in the house. I climbed out the window, walked to
the lake, unfastened the boat, which had been badly
neglected, and rowed quietly out into the pale night.
The mountains, veiled in silvery mist, kept solemn
watch; the moon, which was almost full, seemed to be
suspended just above the peak of the Schwarzenstock.
It was so quiet I could hear the Sennalpstock waterfall
rushing in the distance. The ghosts of my homeland
and of my youth touched me with their pale wings,
crowded upon me in my small boat, and pointed en-
treatingly with outstretched hands. They made painful
and incomprehensible gestures.

What was the meaning of my life? Why had so
many joys and sorrows passed over me? Why had I
thirsted for the true and the beautiful and why was my
thirst still unquenched? Why had I been in love and
suffered so much for these women—lI whose head was
bowed again in shame for an unfulfilled love. And why
had God placed the burning need to be loved in my
heart when in fact he had destined me to live the life of
a recluse whom no one loved?

( 129



PETER CAMENZIND

The water gurgled dully against the bow and trickled
like silver from the oars; the mountains stood close and
silent; the cool moonlight shifted from one mist-filled
ravine to the other. The ghosts of my youth stood
silently about me and gazed at me from deep eyes,
silent and searching. It seemed to me I could make out
the beautiful Elizabeth among them. She would have
loved me and become mine if I had only come at the
right time.

I felt it would be best if I were to sink quietly into the
pale lake and if no one would ever ask what had
become of me. Yet I rowed more swiftly when I noticed
the rotten old boat drawing water. Suddenly I felt a
chill and hastened to get home.

When I got there, I lay in bed exhausted yet wide
awake. I reflected upon my life, seeking to find out
what I lacked that would lead me to a happier and more
genuine existence. I was well aware that the heart of
love is goodness and gladness. I would have to begin to
love mankind despite my fresh grief. But how and
whom?

Then I thought of my old father and I realized for
the first time that I had never loved him as I should
have. I had made life difficult for him when I was
young; I had gone away and left him alone after my
mother’s death. I had often been angry with him and
finally almost forgotten him completely. The image of

130 )



CHAPTER SIX
him lying on his deathbed began to haunt me: I stood
beside it watching his soul slowly ebb away—this soul I
had never known and whose love I had never sought to
win.

And so I embarked on the difficult yet sweet task of
learning from a cantankerous old drunkard instead of
from a beautiful and beloved woman. My replies to him
became more considerate, I spent as much time with
him as I could, read him stories from the almanac, told
him about French and Italian wines. I let him continue
the little work he had to do, as he would have lost all
hold on himself without it. But I never succeeded in
getting him to take his measure of wine at home in-
stead of at the inn. We tried it a few times. I fetched
wine and cigars and went to some lengths to amuse
him at home. The fourth or fifth evening of the ex-
periment, he was silent and stubborn. When I asked
what bothered him, he finally complained: “I'm afraid
you're never going to let your father set foot in the
tavern again.”

“Nonsense,” I said. “You're my father and it’s for you
to decide what we'll do.”

He looked at me quizzically. Then he picked up his
cap and we marched off to the tavern.

It was obvious that my father disliked being alone
with me for any length of time, though he did not say
so. Besides, I felt the urge to let my wounds heal in a

( 131



PETER CAMENZIND
foreign land. “What would you think if I left you again
one of these days?” I asked him. He scratched his head,
shrugged his shoulders, and laughed slyly and expec-
tantly: “As you like.” Before leaving, I called on a few
neighbors and on the monks and asked them to keep an
eye on him.

I also reserved one day to climb the Sennalpstock.
From its broad, half-round summit I could look across
mountain ranges and valleys, glistening lakes, and the
haze of distant cities. These sights had filled me with
such powerful longings as a boy. I had gone out to
conquer the beautiful wide world for myself; now it lay
spread out before me as beautiful and enigmatic as
ever. I was ready to go forth and seek my luck once
more.

I had long ago decided that it would benefit my
studies if I were to spend some time in Assisi. First I
returned briefly to Basel, where I took care of a few
pressing matters, packed my few belongings, and sent
them ahead to Perugia. I myself took the train only as
far as Florence and from there hiked south in a lei-
surely fashion. In this region you do not need to resort
to artifice to get along well with people. The life they
lead is so naive, open, and free that on your way from
one town to the next you can make as many friends as
you want. I felt safe again and at home. Later on, in
Basel, I knew I would not seek the comfort of human
company in “society” but among the ordinary people.

132 )



CHAPTER SIX

The mere fact of being alive was a joy in Perugia and
Assisi. My interest in historical studies revived, my
wounded soul began to heal, and I threw out new
bridges to life. My concierge in Assisi, a voluble and
devout grocer, entered into a deep friendship with me
on the basis of several conversations we had about St.
Francis—that was how I acquired the reputation of
being a “good Catholic.” As undeserved as this honor
was, it made it possible for me to become more inti-
mately acquainted with the people; I was no longer
suspected of being a heathen, a taint attached to most
foreigners in this region. Annunziata Nardini, my con-
cierge, was thirty-four years old, a widow of colossal
girth and exquisite manners. On Sundays, attired in
cheerful flowery dresses, earrings, a golden chain that
dangled on her bosom a collection of hammered-gold
medallions tinkling and glistening, she looked the very
embodiment of the holiday spirit. She carried about a
heavy breviary embossed with silver (whose use, no
doubt, would have given her some difficulty) and a
beautiful black-and-white rosary with slender silver
links (which she could handle much more dexter-
ously). Between church services she would return to
her loggetta to hold forth to her awed neighbors on the
sins of absent friends. Her round pious face would
acquire the poignant expression of a soul at peace with
God.

Since my name was too difficult to pronounce cor-

( 133



PETER CAMENZIND
rectly, I was simply called Signor Pietro. On golden
evenings Signora Nardini and I would sit together in
the tiny loggetta, surrounded by neighbors, children,
cats, and dogs. In the store itself, amid fruit, baskets of
vegetables, seed boxes, and the smoked sausages dan-
gling from the ceiling, we recounted our experiences to
each other, discussed harvest prospects; I smoked a
cigar, or we both sucked melon slices. I told them about
St. Francis, the story of Portiuncula and the saint's
church, about St. Clare and the first Franciscan friars.
Everyone listened intently, put a thousand questions to
me, praised the saint, and gradually entered into a dis-
cussion of more recent and more sensational events,
with particular preference for stories about robberies
and political feuds. Cats, children, and dogs cater-
wauled around our feet. From personal inclination and
to maintain my reputation, I ransacked the saintly
legends for edifying and touching anecdotes, and was
pleased to have brought along Arnold’s Lives of the
Patriarchs and Other Saintly Persons, among several
other books. These frank and simple stories I translated,
with little variations, into idiomatic Italian. Passers-by
would stop and listen and then join in our talk; in this
way, the audience changed three or four times an
evening. Signora Nardini and I were the only perma-
nent fixtures and were never absent. I would always
have a bottle of red wine beside me, and the frugal

134 )



CHAPTER SIX

people were impressed by my lordly consumption
Gradually, even the bashful neighborhood girls began
to trust me and take part in the conversations from the
doorstep. They allowed me to make them presents of
small pictures and began to take me for a saint because
I did not tease them with suggestive jokes or seem to
make an effort to gain their confidence. Among them
there were several big-eyed, dreamy beauties who could
have been models for Perugino. I was fond of them all
and enjoyed their playful, good-natured company. Yet I
did not fall in love with any of them, for their beauty
was so much the same that it seemed a racial rather
than a personal quality. Someone else who joined us
was Matteo Spinelli, a young fellow, son of a baker, a
witty and wily joker who could imitate any number of
animals, knew all the latest scandal, and was fairly
bursting with impudent and clever ruses. He would
listen with exemplary piety and humility as I recounted
my legends; then, by naively asking a serious or a
malicious question, or by comparing or speculating, he
would ridicule the holy friars, to the dismay of the
grocer’s widow and the undisguised delight of most of
the audience.

Frequently I would just sit alone with Signora
Nardini, listen to her edifying discourses, and take an
unholy pleasure in the multitude of her very human
weaknesses. None of her neighbors’ faults or vices

( 135



PETER CAMENZIND
escaped her vigilance; to each of them she judiciously
assigned an appropriate place in purgatory well in
advance. But I had found a place in her heart, and she
confided the most trivial experiences and observations
to me in great detail and at great length. She inquired
how much I paid for every purchase I made, so that I
would not be taken advantage of. She had me tell her
the lives of the saints, and in return acquainted me
with the secrets of the fruit and vegetable trade and the
kitchen.

One evening, as we were sitting in the ramshackle
loggetta, I sang one of my Swiss songs, to the shriek-
ing delight of the children and girls, and then gave
forth with a few brief bursts of yodeling. The chil-
dren wriggled with pleasure, imitated the sound of the
foreign tongue, and showed me how amusingly my
Adam’s apple jigged up and down when I yodeled. All
at once, everybody began speaking of love. The girls
giggled, Signora Nardini rolled her eyes imploringly
and sighed sentimentally. Finally I was besieged to tell
of my own experiences. I made no mention of Eliza-
beth, but told them about my boat trip with Erminia
and my ill-fated proposal of love. It seemed odd to
recount this story, of which I had not breathed a word
to anyone except Richard, to my inquisitive Umbrian
audience in full view of the narrow southern streets
and the hills bathed in the golden-red evening light. I

136 )



CHAPTER SIX
told my story without commenting on it as I went
along, in the manner of the old novellas, yet my heart
was in the telling and I was secretly afraid that my
listeners would laugh at me.

But when my tale was told, all eyes looked at me
sadly and full of sympathy.

“Such a handsome man,” one of the girls exclaimed.
“Such a handsome man to be unhappy in love!”

Signora Nardini, however, gently stroked my hair
and said: “Poverino.”

Another girl made me a present of a pear and when I
asked her to take the first bite she did so, looking
seriously at me. Yet, when I was going to let the others
have a bite too, she would not allow it, saying: “No, eat
it yourself! I gave it to you because you told us of your
bad luck.”

“You're bound to fall in love again,” said a deeply
tanned farmer.

“No,” I replied.

“Then you're still in love with this Erminia?”

“Now I only love St. Francis, and he has taught me to
love all mankind. You, and all the people of Perugia,
and all these children here, and even Erminia’s lover.”

My idyllic existence became somewhat complicated,
even endangered, when I discovered that the good Sig-
nora Nardini wished for me to prolong my stay indefi-
nitely by marrying her. This little problem made a

( 137



PETER CAMENZIND

cunning diplomat of me, since destroying her dreams
without ruining our relationship was no easy matter. I
had to think about my return home. If it had not been
for what I hoped to write one day, and an imminent
financial crisis, I would have remained. I might even
have married Signora Nardini thanks to that “financial
crisis.” But no, what really made me decide to leave was
my desire to see Elizabeth again—my sorrow had not
healed.

My plump widow acquiesced to the inevitable with
surprising graciousness and did not make me suffer for
her disappointment. My departure, in fact, became
more difficult for me than for her. I was leaving much
more behind than I had ever left before. Never had my
hand been pressed so affectionately by so many people.
They provided me with fruit, wine, cordials, bread, and
sausages for the journey. I had the unusual feeling of
leaving friends to whom it really mattered whether I
went or stayed. Signora Annunziata Nardini kissed me
on both cheeks and her eyes filled with tears.

I used to believe it would be delightful to be loved
without loving back. Now I discovered how painful love
can be when you cannot return it. Still, I felt flattered
that a woman loved me and wanted me for a husband.

Even this touch of vanity meant that I was recover-
ing. I felt sorry for the signora but I would not have
wanted to miss that experience. Gradually I began to

138 )



CHAPTER SIX

realize how little happiness has to do with the fulfill-
ment of outward wishes. The agonies young men suffer
when they are in love, however painful, have nothing in
common with tragedy. It hurt not to possess Elizabeth,
but my life, my freedom, my work, and my thoughts
were unimpaired, and I could still love her as much as I
wanted from afar. Such thoughts as these and the free
and easy life I had led in Umbria were very good for
me. I had always had an eye for the comic and ridicu-
lous in life, but my ironic turn of mind kept me from
enjoying what I perceived. Now I began to appreciate
these humorous things. It began to appear more and
more possible to become reconciled to my destiny and
not begrudge myself some of the small joys of life.

Of course, you always feel like that when you've just
returned from Italy. You don’t give a hoot about prin-
ciples and prejudices, you smile indulgently, keep your
hands in your pockets, and consider yourself a shrewd
man of the world. For a while you let yourself drift with
the easy, warm life of people in the south and begin to
believe you can go on living like that when you're back
home. Each time I returned from Italy, I felt this way,
and more so on this occasion than on any other. When
I reached Basel, only to find the same old inflexible life
unchanged and unchangeable, I meekly and angrily
descended from my heights step by step. Yet part of
what I had acquired stayed with me. Never after did my

( 139



PETER CAMENZIND
little boat sail through clear or troubled waters without
sporting at least one brightly colored, defiantly flutter-
ing, confident pennant.

In other ways, too, many of my views had gradually
changed. Without much regret I felt myself outgrow-
ing my adolescence and maturing to the point where
life appears a short path, yourself a traveler whose
peregrinations and final disappearance are of no great
consequence to the world. You keep your eyes fixed on
your objective, a favorite dream. But you never consider
yourself indispensable and you indulge yourself with
rest periods every so often, and don’t mind losing an
entire day lying down in the grass, whistling a tune and
enjoying the present without any thought of the future.
Although I had never worshipped Zarathustra, I had
been what is known as a Herrenmensch and until now
had never lacked for self-veneration or been sparing
with disdain of my inferiors. Now I began to see that
there are no hard and fast boundaries; that life among
poor, oppressed, humble people is as varied as life
among the distinguished and favored few, and on the
whole warmer and more genuine and exemplary.

Besides, I returned to Basel just in time to attend the
first soiree at Elizabeth’s house—she had been married
while I was away. I was in good spirits, still fresh and
tanned from my trip, and able to tell any number of
amusing anecdotes. The lovely woman seemed to take

140 )



CHAPTER SIX

pleasure in singling me out for her trust. Throughout
the evening I rejoiced in my luck at having been spared
the disgrace of a belated proposal. For despite my
Italian experience, I still harbored the suspicion that
women take cruel delight in the hopeless agony of men
who are in love with them. I had the liveliest illustra-
tion of such a humiliating and painful situation in the
form of a story told me by a five-year-old boy. In the
school he attended, the following remarkable and sym-
bolic custom was practiced. If one of the boys was
guilty of a gross misdemeanor and had to be punished,
six girls would be ordered to hold the struggling victim
in the required position. Holding the boy was consid-
ered a great pleasure and privilege, so the sadistic task
was reserved for the six best-behaved girls in class—the
moment's paragons of virtue. I have often thought
about this amusing childhood anecdote and on occasion
it has even crept into my dreams. Thus I know, at least
from my dream experience, how miserable a man feels
in such a situation.

( 141





Chapter Seven

I HAD AS LITTLE RESPECT for my own writing as ever.
I was able to live from the proceeds of my work,
save small amounts, and even send my father a little
money now and then. He cheerfully took it right to the
tavern, where he sang my praises. It even occurred to
him to do me a favor in return. I once told him that I
earned most of my money writing newspaper articles,
so he thought I was an editor or reporter of the kind
employed by the provincial papers. Now he dictated
three letters to me, reporting what he felt were im-
portant events that would supply me with copy and
income. The first item concerned a barn fire; there fol-
lowed a report about two tourists who had a mountain-
climbing accident; and last, he sent the results of the
election for village mayor. These missives were couched
in grotesque journalese but made me genuinely happy,
for they were a sign of true friendship between us—
they were the first letters I had received from home in
years. Moreover, I found them refreshing as a kind of
unwitting deprecation of my own scribbling, for month
after month I reviewed books the importance and con-
sequence of whose publication were minute compared
with what happened in the provinces.

( 143



PETER CAMENZIND

Just about that time, books were published by two
writers whom I had known as outrageously lyrical
youths during my days in Zurich. One of them lived in
Berlin now and knew lots of pornographic stories about
café society and the brothels of the capital. The second
had built himself a luxurious hermitage outside Mu-
nich, and teetered despicably and hopelessly between
neurotic introspection and spiritist stimulants. I had to
review their books and of course I made harmless fun
of both of them. The neurotic’s sole reply was a con-
temptuous letter—written, however, in a truly princely
style. The Berliner made my review the occasion for a
scandal in a literary journal, claiming I had misunder-
stood his real intent. He invoked Zola’s literary princi-
ples and used my unsympathetic review as a basis for
an attack not just on me personally but on the con-
ceited and prosaic nature of the Swiss people as a
whole. As it happens, the man had spent the only
healthy and comparatively dignified period of his lit-
erary life in Zurich. I had never been noted for exces-
sive patriotism, but this overdose of Berlin snottiness
was a little too much for me and I sent the malcontent
a letter that did not disguise my contempt for his over-
blown metropolitan modernism.

The quarrel made me feel better and forced me once
more to reevaluate my opinions of modern culture. This
proved tedious and difficult and had few if any pleasant

144 )



CHAPTER SEVEN
results. My book will hardly suffer if I omit them. Yet
these observations also compelled me to think more
deeply about my long-planned life’s work.

As you know, it had been my hope to write a work of
some length in which I intended to bring closer to
people the graridiose and mute life of nature, that they
might love it. I wanted to teach people to listen to the
pulse of nature, to partake of the wholeness of life and
not forget, under the pressure of their petty destinies,
that we are not gods and have not created ourselves but
are children of the earth, part of the cosmos. I wanted
to remind them that night, rivers, oceans, drifting
clouds, storms, like creatures of the poet’s imagination
and of our dreams, are symbols and bearers of our
yearning that spread their wings between heaven and
earth, their objectives being the indubitable right to life
and the immortality of all living things. Each being’s
innermost core is certain of these rights as a child of
God, and reposes without fear in the lap of eternity.
Everything evil, sick, and diseased that we carry in us
contradicts life and proclaims death. But I also wanted
to teach men to find the sources of joy and life in the
love of nature. I wanted to preach the pleasures of look-
ing at nature, of wandering in it, and of taking delight
in the present.

I wanted to let mountains, oceans, and green islands
speak to you convincingly with their enticing tongues,

( 145



PETER CAMENZIND

and wanted to compel you to see the immeasurably
varied and exuberant life blossoming and overflowing
outside your houses and cities each and every day. I
wanted you to feel ashamed of knowing more about
foreign wars, fashions, gossip, literature, and art than
of the springs bursting forth outside your towns, than
of the rivers flowing under your bridges, than of the
forests and marvelous meadows through which your
railroads speed. I wanted to let you know what a golden
chain of unforgettable pleasures I, a melancholy re-
cluse, had found in this world and I desired that you,
who are perhaps happier and more cheerful than I,
should discover even greater joy in it.

Above all, I wanted to implant the secret of love in
your hearts. I hoped to teach you to be brothers to all
living things, and become so full of love that you will
not fear even sorrow and death and receive them like
brothers and sisters when they come to you.

All this I hoped to convey not in hymns but truth-
fully, simply, and factually—with the same combina-
tion of seriousness and humor with which a returning
traveler tells his friends what he has experienced.

I wanted, I wished, I hoped: I know it sounds odd,
but I am still waiting for the day when all this want-
ing will resolve itself in a form and a plan. I had
collected much material, in my head and in the small
notebooks I carried with me on my trips and hikes,
filling one every few weeks. In these I made brief no-

146 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

tations of everything I saw in the world, without re-
flection or transitions. They are more like painters’
sketchbooks and in few words capture concrete, real
things: country lanes and well-traveled roads, aspects
of mountains and cities, conversations overheard
among farmers, artisans, market women, rules by
which to forecast the weather, notes on light effects,
winds, rain, rocks, plants, animals, the flight of birds,
the shapes of waves and clouds, the colors of the sea.
Occasionally I constructed short stories around these
observations and published them as nature and travel
studies, but without relating them to man. The story
of a tree, an animal, or the course of a cloud was inter-
esting enough without human scaffolding.

It occurred to me, of course, that a work of such
scope without any human figures would be grotesque.
Yet for years I strove after this ideal, cherishing the
hope that some great inspiration would help me over-
come the impossible. I finally realized that I would have
to put people in my beautiful landscapes, but I knew I
was not able to represent them as they are. I had
much ground to make up, and I am making up that lost
ground even today. I had always thought of mankind as
a mass, as something alien; now I learned the great
worth of the individual—not “abstract humanity”—and
my notebooks and my memory began to fill up with
entirely new sketches.

At first these observations proved rewarding: I shed

( 147



PETER CAMENZIND

my naive indifference and became interested in a wide
range of people. I saw how much of what is everywhere
taken for granted was foreign to me; I also realized how
greatly my many trips and hikes had opened and sharp-
ened my eyes. And because I have always been drawn
to children, it gave me particular pleasure to be in their
company.

Still, I found the observation of clouds and waves
more enjoyable than the study of mankind. I realized
with astonishment that man is distinguished from the
rest of nature primarily by a slippery, protective en-
velope of illusions and lies. In a very short time, I
observed this phenomenon among all my acquain-
tances. It is the result of each person’s having to make
believe that he is a unique individual, whereas no one
really knows his own innermost nature. Somewhat be-
wildered, I noticed the same trait in myself and I now
gave up the attempt to get to the core of people. In most
cases the protective envelope was of crucial importance
anyway. I found it everywhere, even among children,
who, whether consciously or unconsciously, always
play a role completely and instinctively instead of
displaying who they are.

After a while I began to feel I was making no
progress and was wasting my time with trivia. First I
sought to locate the fault in myself, yet I could not long
deceive myself: I was disillusioned, my environment

148 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

simply did not provide the people I was searching for. I
needed not characters but prototypes, which neither my
circle of academicians nor my socialites provided. I
thought of Italy with longing, and the friends and
companions of my many hikes, the apprentice journey-
men. Many a one I walked side by side with had turned
out to be a fine fellow.

Visiting the local youth hostel or flophouses was use-
less. Drifting hoboes and tramps were of no help to
me. So I was at a loss once more, and confined my
studies to children. Then I started to hang around
taverns, where, of course, I found nothing. There fol-
lowed several unhappy weeks in which I doubted my
judgment and concluded that my hopes and wishes
were exaggerated and ridiculous. I spent much of my
time roaming the countryside and brooded away many
an evening over wine.

Around that time several stacks of books I would
have preferred keeping instead of selling to the second-
hand dealer accumulated on my table; there was no
room for them on my bookshelves. To solve the prob-
lem, I went to see a carpenter and asked him to come
to my quarters to take measurements for a bookcase.

One day he came: a slightly built, slow-moving man
with a cautious manner. He measured the room, knelt
on the floor, extended the measuring stick to the ceil-
ing, and painstakingly noted dimension after dimension

( 149



PETER CAMENZIND

in inch-high figures in his notebook. He smelled faintly
of glue. As he moved about, he jostled an armchair
laden with books. A few of them dropped to the floor
and he bent down to pick them up. Among them was a
pocket dictionary of vocational slang. You can find this
paperbound book in almost all lodging houses in Ger-
many frequented by journeying tradesmen. It is a well-
edited and delightful little volume.

When the carpenter noticed the familiar book, he
shot a curious glance at me, half amused and half
suspicious.

“What's the matter?” I asked.

“There’s a book here I know. Do you really study it?”

“I studied it while I was out on the road,” I replied.
“You feel like looking up an expression now and again.”

“Really!” he exclaimed. “You’ve been on the road
yourself?”

“Not quite the way you mean. But I've covered a lot
of ground on foot and spent many a night in a flop-
house.”

Meanwhile he had restacked the books and was
about to leave. “Where did you get to in your travels?”
I asked him.

“From here to Koblenz and later down to Geneva.
Wasn’t the worst time of my life either.”

“Spent a night or two in jail, I suppose?”

“Just once, in Durlach.”

150 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

“T'd like it if you'd tell me more. We'll meet again,
all right, over a glass of wine?”

“I wouldn’t care too much for that. But if you'd like
you can come up to my place after work and shoot the
breeze. I don’t mind, provided you're not pulling my
leg.”

A few days later—Elizabeth was having open house
—I stopped in the middle of the street and considered
whether I wouldn't rather spend the evening with the
carpenter instead. I turned around, went home and left
my frock coat, and went to visit him. His workshop was
closed and dark inside, and I stumbled through a
gloomy hallway and a courtyard and climbed up and
down the back staircase several times before finding a
sign on a door with the master’s name on it. Upon
entering, I stepped directly into a tiny kitchen where a
gaunt woman was preparing dinner and watching over
three children at the same time, so that the narrow
room was full of life and considerable noise. Somewhat
taken aback, the woman led me into the adjacent room,
where the carpenter sat at the window reading his
paper in the twilight. First he grumbled, because he
mistook me for an overeager client. Then he recognized
me and shook my hand.

Because he had been taken by surprise and was
embarrassed, I turned to the children, who ran back
into the kitchen. I followed them. The sight of the

( 151



PETER CAMENZIND
carpenter's wife preparing a rice dish brought back
memories of my Umbrian padrona and I lent a hand
with the cooking. In our part of the world rice generally
is boiled until it turns into a paste lacking all flavor,
which sticks to your gums like glue. The same calamity
was about to occur here and I saved the meal just in
time by reaching for the pot and ladle and taking
charge of the preparations myself. The woman sub-
mitted to my intrusion in astonishment, the rice turned
out passably, she served it, turned on the lamp, and I
had a plateful myself.

The carpenter’s wife thereupon engaged me in such
a detailed conversation about cooking that her husband
scarcely got a word in edgewise and had to put off
to another evening the story of his adventures as a
journeyman apprentice. They sensed soon enough that
I was a gentleman in appearance only and basically a
farmer’s son and the child of ordinary people, and so
that first evening we were already on good terms. For
just as they recognized me as their equal, I recognized
my native atmosphere in this poor household. These
people had no time for refinements, for posturing and
sentimental charades. Their harsh and demanding life
was much too dear for them to adorn it with pretty
phrases.

I visited the carpenter more and more often and not
only did I forget society's shabby nonsense but also my

152 )



CHAPTER SEVEN
melancholy and my shortcomings. It was as if I had
discovered a piece of my childhood and was continuing
the life the monks had interrupted when they sent me
to school.

Bent over a torn and yellowing, old-fashioned map,
the carpenter and I traced our respective journeys and
rejoiced over each city gate and street we both knew.
We told all the old traveler’s jokes and once even sang
some of the old songs. We discussed the difficulties of
the trade, the household, the children, the affairs of the
city—and gradually our roles were reversed. I was
grateful to him and he taught me and gave me some-
thing of himself. With immense relief, I felt sur-
rounded by reality, rather than drawing-room noise.

Of his children, his five-year-old daughter caught my
eye, because she was especially delicate. Her name was
Agnes, and she was called Aggie. She was blond, pale,
fragile, and had large, timid eyes and a gentle and shy
nature. One Sunday when I came to join the family for
a long walk, Aggie was sick. Her mother stayed with
her, and we walked slowly to the outskirts of town. Be-
hind St. Margaret's Church we two men sat down on a
bench, The children went off in search of flowers,
rocks, and bugs, while we surveyed the summer mead-
ows, the Binning cemetery, and the beautiful blue
range of the Jura Mountains. The carpenter was tired
and depressed.

( 153



PETER CAMENZIND

“What's wrong?” I asked when the children had
gone. He looked at me sadly.

“Haven’t you seen?” he said. “Aggie’s dying. I've
known it for a long time, and I’m only surprised she’s
lived as long as she has. She’s always had death in
her eyes, and now there’s no doubt.”

I made an attempt to console him, but soon gave
up.

“You see,” he smiled sadly, “you don’t believe either
that she'll live. I’m no fatalist, you know, and I go to
church only once in a long while, but I can feel in my
bones that the Almighty wants a word with me now.
She’s only a child, I know, and she’s never been well,
but God knows I love her more than the others.”

Shouting joyously, the children came running up to
us with a thousand questions, pressed close to us,
asked if I knew the narnes of weeds and flowers, and
finally asked that I tell them a story. So I told them that
each of the flowers, trees, and bushes had a soul of its
own, like a child and its guardian angel. The father
listened too and smiled, and here and there added a
word for emphasis. We watched the blue of the moun-
tains grow more intense, heard the tolling of evening
bells, and started back. The crimson breath of evening
hung over the meadows, the spires of the cathedral
pointed small and thin into the warm air, the sky
gradually changed from summer blue to a beautiful

154 )



CHAPTER SEVEN
greenish-golden hue, the trees cast longer and longer
shadows. The children were tired and subdued. Perhaps
they were thinking of the guardian angels of poppies,
pinks, and harebells, while we older ones thought of
Aggie, whose soul was about to take wing and leave our
timid little band behind.

The next two weeks, all went well. Aggie seemed to
be rallying; she was able to leave her bed for a few
hours a day and looked prettier and happier, propped
on her cool pillows, than ever before. Then there were
several feverish nights, and we realized without a word
being said that she would not be with us for more than
a few days, or a week. Only once did her father speak of
it. It was in his workshop. I saw him rummaging about
in his stack of boards and knew instinctively that he
was selecting pieces for the child’s coffin.

“It's a matter of days anyway,” he said. “And I'd
rather do it after everyone’s gone home.”

I sat down on one of the benches while he went on
working at the other. When the boards were planed
smooth, he showed them to me with a kind of pride.
He'd used a good, sound, unblemished piece of pine.

“It’s not going to be nailed together; I'll make the
pieces dovetail, so that it'll be a good, lasting piece of
work. But that’s enough for today. Let’s go on up to the
wife.”

The midsummer days went by, each warmer and

€ 155



PETER CAMENZIND
more lovely than the other, and every day I would sit
with Aggie for an hour or two, telling her about lovely
meadows and forests, holding her frail hand in my
broad palm, my whole being absorbing the sweet clear
grace that was hers to the last day.

Then we stood anxiously and sadly by her side, as
the small, emaciated body gathered its last strength to
wrestle with death; but death vanquished her easily.
Her mother remained calm and strong, but her father
flung himself across the bed and took a hundred fare-
wells, stroking her blond hair and kissing his dead
child.

A brief and simple burial service followed, and then
uncomfortable evenings during which we could hear
the children weeping in bed in the next room. Then
came lovely walks to the cemetery, where we planted
flowers on the fresh grave and sat on a bench in the
cool grounds, gazing with changed eyes on the earth in
which our dear one lay buried, and on the trees that
grew above it, and on the birds whose song, uninhibited
and as gay as ever, floated through the quiet church-
yard.

Simultaneously the strict routine of work took its
course, the children began to sing again, fighting
among themselves, laughing, and asking for stories,
and almost unawares we all became accustomed to not
seeing Aggie ever again.

While all this was happening, I did not visit the

156 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

professor's house once. I saw Elizabeth only a few
times, and on these occasions I felt strangely con-
strained and at a loss during our tepid conversations.
Now I went to visit both houses, only to find them
locked for the summer. Everyone had gone to the coun-
try long ago. Only then did I realize that my friendship
with the carpenter and my preoccupation with the sick
child had made me forget all about the hot season and
taking a holiday. Before, I would have found it im-
possible to remain in town in July and August.

I bid Basel goodbye for a short time and set out on a
walking tour through the Black Forest. During the trip
I had the rare pleasure of sending the carpenter’s chil-
dren picture postcards of all the places I visited, and
imagining how I would describe to them everything I
was seeing.

In Frankfurt I decided to take a few extra days and
went on to Aschaffenburg, Nuremberg, Munich, and
Ulm. I took renewed pleasure in the old works of art.
Finally I even stopped briefly in Zurich. All these years
I had avoided that city as if it were a grave; now I
rambled down the familiar streets, sought out the old
taverns and beer-gardens, and thought back on the
wonderful years I had spent here.

Erminia was married. Someone gave me her address
and one evening I went to call on her. I read her hus-
band’s name on the door, looked up at the window, and
hesitated. Then the old days came alive within me and

( 157



PETER CAMENZIND
with a gentle ache my old love was roused out of its
slumber. I turned back and did not spoil the idyllic
picture of my beloved with a needless reunion. Walking
on, I came to the garden by the lake where the artists
had held their midsummer fete, and I looked up at the
house in whose attic I had spent three years of my life,
and from this stream of memories the name Elizabeth
suddenly sprang to my lips. My new love was stronger
after all than all previous infatuations. It was also
quieter, less demanding, more grateful.

Pleased with my mood, I untied one of the boats and
rowed with easy, leisurely strokes out onto the warm
bright lake. Evening was near and a single lovely snow-
white cloud hung high in the sky. I kept my eyes on it,
giving it a friendly nod as I thought back on my child-
hood love of clouds, on Elizabeth, on that Segantini
cloud in front of which J had seen her so beautiful and
enraptured. Never before had I felt my love for her—
untarnished by a single wrong word or low desire—to
be so purifying and ennobling as now. At the sight of
this cloud, I gazed back calmly and thankfully on
everything good in my life, troubled no longer by the
confusions and passions of my adolescence, experienc-
ing the old yearning but in a more mature and tranquil
way.

] had always sung a tune, or hummed, to the beat of
oars on the water. I sang softly to myself now and
realized that I was singing verse. I remembered it and

158 )



CHAPTER SEVEN
wrote it down at home, as a souvenir of that beautiful
evening on the lake in Zurich:

Wie eine weisse Wolke

Am hohen Himmel steht,

So licht und schén und ferne
Bist du, Elisabeth.

Die Wolke geht und wandert,
Kaum hast du ihrer acht,

Und doch durch deine Trdume
Geht sie bei dunkler Nacht.

Geht und erglanzt so selig,
Dass fortan ohne Rast

Du nach der weissen Wolke
Ein siisses Heimweh hast.

[“Like the white cloud, high in the sky, you are bright
and beautiful and unattainable, Elizabeth. / The cloud
drifts and wanders off while you look at it, yet in the
dark night it drifts through your dreams / —drifts and
shines so blissfully that forevermore you will ache for
the white cloud with sweet desire.”]

On my return to Basel there was a letter for me from
Assisi. It was from Signora Nardini and full of good
news. She had found a second husband after all. But I
think I'll just quote her letter to you:

( 159



PETER CAMENZIND
My very dear Herr Peter!

Allow your faithful friend the liberty of writing to
you. It has pleased God to grant me a piece of great
good fortune and I would like to invite you to my
wedding on the twelfth of October. His name is
Menotti. He has little money, yet he loves me very
much and knows all about the fruit trade. He is hand-
some but not as strong and beautiful as you, Herr
Peter! He will sell fruit on the piazza while I look after
the shop. Lovely Marietta—you remember, our neigh-
bor’s girl—is also getting married, but only to a stone-
mason from out of town.

I think of you every day and have told many people
about you. I am very fond of you and have donated four
candles to Saint Francis in memory of you. Menotti will
be happy too if you come to the wedding. If he gets
unfriendly with you then, I'll make him stop. Unfortu-
nately little Matteo Spinelli is really a louse as I always
said he was. He always stole lemons from me and now
they've taken him away because he stole twelve lire
from his father, the baker, and because he poisoned the
dog of the beggar Giangiacomo.

I wish you the blessing of God and of Saint Francis. I
long to see you.

Your devoted and faithful friend,

Annunziata Nardini
160 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

Postscript — Our harvest was so-so. The grapes
didn’t do well at all, and there weren’t enough pears
either. But we had plenty of lemons, so many we had to
sell them cheap. A horrible accident happened in
Spello. A young fellow killed his brother with a rake.
No one knows why. He must have been envious of him
even though they were brothers.

Unfortunately, I could not accept the invitation,
tempting though it was. I sent my best regards and
promised to visit in the spring. Then I took a present I
had bought for the children in Nuremberg and went to
see the carpenter.

There I found a great and unexpected change. Be-
tween the window and the table was crouched a gro-
tesque figure in something like a baby’s highchair. This
was Boppi, the wife’s brother, a poor, half-paralyzed
hunchback for whom no other place had been found
after his mother’s death. The carpenter had taken him
in quite reluctantly, and the cripple’s presence was like
a dead-weight on the desolate household. They had not
yet grown used to him. The children were frightened;
his embarrassed sister pitied him halfheartedly; and
her husband was obviously disgruntled.

Boppi had no neck. His was an ugly double hunch on
which rested a large, sharp-featured head with a strong
nose, a broad forehead, and a beautiful, languishing

( 161



PETER CAMENZIND
mouth. His eyes were clear and calm, yet frightened,
and his small, delicate hands lay white and unmoving
on his narrow breast. I too felt embarrassed and put off
by the pathetic intruder. It was uncomfortable to listen
to the carpenter recount the invalid’s story while he sat
in the same room gazing at his hands, neither of us
talking to him. He was born crippled but had completed
grade school. He had been able to make himself some-
what useful for many years by weaving in straw. Then
repeated attacks of gout had partially paralyzed him.
For years now, he'd either lain in bed or been propped
up on cushions in his strange chair. His sister said she
remembered he used to sing beautifully to himself at
one time, though sometimes she hadn't heard him sing
for years, and never once since he had moved into the
house. While all this was being told and discussed, he
sat there staring into the distance. I felt ill at ease and
soon left and did not come again for some days.

I had been strong and healthy all my life. I had never
once been seriously ill and regarded invalids, especially
cripples, with pity and with some contempt too. It did
not suit me at al] to have my leisurely, cheerful life in
the bosom of this family disturbed by the coming of this
miserable creature. Therefore I postponed my visit
from one day to the next and tried vainly to think of a
way to get the cripple out of the house. There had to be
some inexpensive way of placing him in a hospital or

162 )



CHAPTER SEVEN
nursing home. A number of times I even thought of
going to see the carpenter to talk to him about it. But I
hesitated to bring up the subject myself, and I had a
childish horror of meeting the invalid. It filled me with
revulsion to see him and to shake his hand.

So I let the first Sunday pass and did nothing. The
second Sunday, I was all set to take the early-morning
train to the Jura Mountains when I felt suddenly
ashamed of my cowardice. I stayed home and went to
see the carpenter after lunch.

With great reluctance I shook Boppi’s hand. The
carpenter was in a bad humor and suggested we go for
a walk. He said he was fed up with this misery. I
was glad to find him in a frame of mind receptive
to my suggestion. His wife wanted to stay home, but
Boppi asked her to go along with us. He said it was just
as well if he was alone. If he had a book to read and a
glass of water within reach, they could lock the door
behind them and not worry about it.

And we who thought of ourselves as decent, good-
hearted people locked him in and went for a walk. And
we enjoyed ourselves, had fun with the children, and
delighted in the golden autumn sun. We did not feel
ashamed or worry about having left the cripple alone in
the house. On the contrary, we were glad to be rid of
him, With relief we breathed in the clear, sun-warmed
air and gave every appearance of being an appreciative,

( 163



PETER CAMENZIND
healthy family enjoying God’s Sunday with under-
standing and gratitude.

Boppi was not mentioned until we were all seated
around a table at an outdoor restaurant. The carpenter
complained what a burden the lodger was, sighed at the
room he took up and the expenses that were incurred
on his account, and finally laughed, saying: “Well, at
least we can be happy for an hour out here without him
disturbing us.”

These thoughtless words made me realize that the
helpless cripple, beseeching, suffering Boppi, whom we
did not love, whom we wanted to get rid of, sat sad and
alone, locked in one room. It would be getting dark
shortly and he would be unable to light the lamp or
move closer to the window. He would have to put down
the book and wait in the dark, with no one to talk to or
pass the time with, while we drank wine, laughed, and
enjoyed ourselves. And then I remembered that I had
told the neighbors in Assisi about St. Francis and had
boasted that he had taught me to love all mankind.
Why had I studied the saint’s life and learned by heart
his hymn to love and tried to retrace his footsteps in the
Umbrian hills, when I allowed a poor and helpless
creature to lay there suffering though I could help him?

The weight of an invisible, mighty hand fell on my
heart, crushing it with shame and hurt, and I began
to tremble. I knew that God wanted a word with me.

164 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

“You love a household,” he said, “where people treat
you well and where you spend many happy hours. And
the day I grace this house with my presence, you run
off and scheme to drive me out! You saint, you prophet,
you poet!”

I felt as though I were gazing at myself in a clear and
infallible mirror where I could see that I was a liar, a
braggart, a coward and perjurer. It hurt, it was bitter,
humiliating, and horrible. But what hurt in me and
suffered agonies and reared up in pain deserved to be
broken and destroyed.

Abruptly I rose and left, finishing neither my wine
nor my bread, and rushed back to town. In my excite-
ment I was tortured by the unbearable fear that some-
thing might have happened to Boppi: there might have
been a fire; he might have fallen from his chair, might
lie suffering, perhaps dying, on the floor. I could see
him lying there, myself standing by his side, forced to
endure the cripple’s reproachful looks.

Breathlessly I reached the house and stormed up the
stairs. Then it occurred to me that the door was locked
and I had no key. Yet my fear subsided at once, for
even before I reached the door I heard singing inside. It
was a strange moment. With trembling heart and com-
pletely out of breath I stood on the dark landing and
listened to the cripple’s singing within. Slowly I calmed
down. He sang softly and gently and somewhat mourn-

( 165



PETER CAMENZIND
fully. It was a popular love song, “Flowers, pink and
white.” I knew that he had not sung for a long time and
I was deeply moved that he used this quiet hour alone
to be happy for a while in his own way.

That's the way it is: life loves to put serious and
deeply emotional events in a humorous context. I per-
ceived at once how shameful and ridiculous my position
was. In my panic I had run for miles, only to find
myself without a key. Now I could either leave again or
shout my good intentions through two closed doors. I
stood on the stairs, wanting to console the poor fellow,
to show him my sympathy and help him pass the time,
while he sat inside, unaware of my presence, sing-
ing. It undoubtedly would only have frightened him if I
had called attention to myself by knocking or shouting.

So I had no choice but to leave. I strolled for an hour
through the streets and the Sunday crowds, then I
found that the family had returned. This time I shook
Boppi’s hand without reluctance. I sat down next to
him, engaged him in conversation, and asked what he
was reading. It seemed natural to offer him some books
to read, and he thanked me for that. When I suggested
Jeremias Gotthelf, it turned out that he was familiar
with his work. Gottfried Keller, however, was un-
known to him and I promised to lend him some of
Keller’s books.

Next day when I brought the books I had a chance to

166 )



CHAPTER SEVEN

be alone with him, for his sister was just going out and
her husband was in the workshop. I confessed how
ashamed I felt for leaving him alone the day before and
said I would be glad to sit with him sometimes and be
his friend.

The invalid turned his large head slightly in my
direction, looked at me, and said, “Thank you.” That
was all. But for him to turn his head was a great effort;
it was as if I had received tenfold embraces from some-
one healthy. And his eyes were so bright and innocent
that I blushed with shame.

Now I faced the more difficult task of speaking to the
carpenter. The best course seemed to be an outright
confession of my fear and shame of yesterday. Unfor-
tunately, he did not understand what I had in mind, but
at least he was willing to discuss it. Finally he accepted
my proposal that the cripple should be our mutual
responsibility, that we would share the trifling expense
of keeping him, and I received permission to visit him
whenever I wished. I was free to consider him my
brother.

Fall was warm and beautiful for an exceptionally
long time that year. That was why the first thing I did
was buy Boppi a wheelchair and take him out every
day, mostly in the company of the children.





Chapter Eight

IT SEEMS to have been my bad luck always to re-
ceive more than I could return, from life and
friends. It had been that way with Richard, Eliza-
beth, Signora Nardini, and it had been so with the
carpenter. Now, a full-grown man who did not think all
that badly of himself, I found myself the astonished
and grateful pupil of a wretched cripple. If ever the
time comes when I complete and publish the work I
started so long ago, it will contain little of value not
learned from Boppi. This was the beginning of a good
and happy period in my life, and I have drawn suste-
nance from it ever since. I was granted the privilege of
gazing clearly and deeply into a magnificent soul left
unscathed by illness, loneliness, poverty, and maltreat-
ment.

Aul the petty vices that spoil and embitter our beauti-
ful, brief lives—anger, impatience, mistrust, lies, all
these insufferable, festering sores that disfigure us—
had been burned out of this man through long, intense
suffering. He was no sage or angel but a person full of
understanding and generosity who, under the stress of
horrible agonies and deprivations, had learned to accept

( 169



PETER CAMENZIND
being weak and to commit himself into God’s hands
without being ashamed.

I once asked him how he came to terms with his
weak and pain-racked body.

“It’s quite simple,” he replied, laughing. “I wage a
perpetual war with my illness. Sometimes I win an
encounter, sometimes I lose one, and we go on skir-
mishing anyway. At times we both withdraw and there
is a temporary cease-fire, but we each lie in wait for the
other to become impudent, then we start in all over
again.”

I had always felt that I had an unerring eye, that I
was a good observer. But Boppi taught me even there.
He loved nature, especially animals, and so I frequently
took him to the zoo. There we spent delightful hours.
Before long, Boppi knew them all and, as we always
took bread and sugar, some animals came to recognize
us, and we made all kinds of friends. Oddly enough, we
were particularly fond of the tapir. His only virtue,
which he did not share with the rest of the animals, was
a certain cleanliness. Otherwise we found him unintel-
ligent, unfriendly, ungrateful, and an extreme glutton.
Other animals, the elephant, deer, and chamois in
particular, even the ragged bison, always showed some
sign of gratitude for the sugar they received: either
they threw us a grateful look or they allowed me to pet
them. The tapir gave no such indication at all. As soon

170 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

as we approached, he promptly appeared at his fence,
chewed slowly and methodically what we gave him
and, when he saw that we had no more, went off with-
out as much as blinking an eye. Since he neither
begged nor thanked us for what we gave him but ac-
cepted it routinely, like a natural tribute, we took this
to be a sign of pride and character and called him the
customs collector.

Since Boppi was usually in no position to feed the
animals himself, we sometimes fell to debating whether
the tapir had had his due, or whether we should let him
levy another tidbit. We gave this the most dispassionate
consideration, as though it involved a matter of state
policy. Once, after we left the tapir, Boppi felt we
should have given him one more lump of sugar, so we
turned back. But the tapir, comfortable again on his
straw, merely squinted haughtily and refused to come
to the fence. “Excuse me, Mr. Customs Collector,”
Boppi called to him, “but I believe we short-changed
you one lump.” So we went on to the elephant. Wad-
dling back and forth expectanly, he extended his
warm, pliant trunk in welcome. Boppi was able to feed
the elephant himself and he watched with childish glee
as the giant swung out his limber trunk, picking the
bread out of Boppi’s flat, outstretched hand, squinting
slyly and benignly at us out of tiny, merry eyes.

I reached an agreement with one of the keepers that

( 171



PETER CAMENZIND
Boppi could sit at the zoo in his wheelchair when I had
no time to stay with him, so he’d be able to get the sun
and watch the animals. When I came to fetch him, he
would describe everything he had seen during the day.
What particularly impressed him was how courteously
the lion treated the lioness. As soon as she lay down to
rest, the lion redirected his restless pacing so as not to
brush against her or have to step over her. Most enter-
taining for him were the acrobatics of the otter. He
never tired of the agile water sports this lithe creature
indulged in, as Boppi sat motionless in the chair, each
movement of his head or arms costing him great effort.

On one of the most beautiful days that fall, I told
Boppi the story of my two loves. We were on such
intimate terms now that I felt I could no longer keep
from him even the less pleasing and salutary events of
my life. He listened gravely and sympathetically but
made no comment. Later he confessed a desire to see
Elizabeth and asked me not to forget, should we ever
come across her on the street.

As this did not happen and the days were turning
chilly, I called on Elizabeth and asked her to give the
hunchback the pleasure of seeing her. She kindly con-
sented to my request and one day she had me fetch her
and take her to the zoo, where Boppi waited for us in
his wheelchair. As the lovely, elegantly dressed lady
shook the cripple’s hand, bending down to him a little,

172 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

and poor Boppi looked up at her gratefully and almost
tenderly with his big kind eyes, I could not decide which
of them was more beautiful at this moment or dearer to
my heart. Elizabeth said a few kind words to him, and
the cripple never once took his shining eyes off her. I
stood by, astonished to see the two persons I loved
most, and whose lives were divided by such a deep gulf,
standing hand in hand before me. Boppi did not speak
of anything else except Elizabeth the entire afternoon,
praised her beauty, her distinction, her goodness, her
walk, her dress, her yellow gloves, her green shoes, her
voice, and her pretty hat. But it struck me as painful
and grotesque to stand by and watch as the woman I
loved handed out alms of kindness to my best friend.

Meantime, Boppi had read Keller’s Der Griine Hein-
rich and Die Leute von Seldwyla. He felt so much at
home in the world of these unique books that Schmoller
Pankraz, Albertus Zwiehan, and the self-righteous
combmakers had become our mutual friends. For a
while I considered giving Boppi some of Conrad Ferdi-
nand Meyer’s books, but it seemed unlikely that he
would care for the almost Latin terseness of the style. I
also had my doubts about opening the abyss of history
before his cheerful, calm eyes. Instead, I told him about
St. Francis and gave him Morike’s stories to read.

It was amusing to see how we gradually began ad-
dressing each other in the second person singular.

( 173



PETER CAMENZIND

Actually, I had never asked or offered to use the “thou”
with him, nor would he have accepted. It all happened
quite naturally; we realized we were using it one day
and we couldn’t help smiling, so we let it continue.

When winter put a stop to our excursions and I again
spent entire evenings in the carpenter's living room, I
noticed belatedly that my new friendship had been won
at some cost, for the carpenter was now grumpy, un-
friendly, or simply taciturn. The irksome presence of
the useless lodger he had to feed irritated him as much
as my friendship with Boppi. Sometimes I would sit an
entire evening, chatting gaily with the cripple, while the
master of the house grouchily read his paper. Even his
wife, usually a model of patience, became cross with
her husband; this time she insisted on having her way
and not sending Boppi elsewhere. I made several at-
tempts to mollify the carpenter and to suggest alterna-
tive solutions, but he seemed permanently disgruntled.
He grew caustic and began to jeer at my friendship
with the cripple and make life miserable for him. The
invalid and I, sitting with him much of the time, were
both a burden to the household, which was too crowded
even without us. Still, I had not given up hope that the
carpenter would some day become as fond of Boppi as
I, Finally, however, it became impossible for me to take
a step without either offending the carpenter or making
Boppi unhappy. Since I have always had an abhor-

174 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
rence of making swift or binding decisions—Richard
used to call me Petrus Cunctator, even in Zurich—!I
waited for weeks, afraid that I might lose the friendship
of either, and perhaps of both.

The increasing discomfort of this disruptive situation
drove me to my old haunts, the taverns. One evening,
after the whole loathsome business had made me par-
ticularly angry, I sought refuge in a small Vaudois
wine-hall where I exorcised my misery with several
liters of wine. For the first time in two years I had some
difficulty navigating home in an upright position. As
usual after a hard bout of drinking, my mood the next
day was cool and easy and I plucked up courage and
went to see the carpenter to put an end to this farce
once and for all. I suggested he leave Boppi entirely in
my hands. He seemed agreeable and finally, after mull-
ing it over a few days, he gave his consent.

Soon after, I moved with my crippled friend into a
newly rented apartment. I felt almost as if I were
married, since I now had to take care of a real house-
hold, not just a makeshift bachelor’s quarters. But it all
worked out well, though some of my first housekeeping
experiments misfired. We had a girl come in every day
to clean up and do the laundry. Food was delivered to
the house, and soon both of us felt quite comfortable in
our new quarters. The prospect of having to give up my
hikes and carefree excursions did not worry me yet. I

( 175



PETER CAMENZIND
even found that my friend’s presence had a calming,
productive effect on my work. All the little services
Boppi required were, of course, new to me and I did not
find them pleasant at first, particularly the dressing and
undressing. But he was so patient and grateful that he
made me feel ashamed and I took great care in looking
after him.

Recently I had called only rarely at the professor’s
house, more frequently at Elizabeth's, which, despite
everything that had happened, held a continuing fasci-
nation for me. There I would drink tea or a glass of
wine, watch Elizabeth play hostess, and be overcome
occasionally by bouts of sentimentality, though I was
always ready to pounce with derision on any Werther-
like feelings in myself. Insipid, adolescent selfishness in
love, however, had disappeared for good. A delicate and
intimate state of war was just the right relationship
between Elizabeth and me and we seldom met without
engaging in the friendliest of quarrels. The lively and,
in a feminine way, illogical turn of mind of that clever
woman and my own amorous yet rough-hewn nature
were not ill-matched, and since we felt a genuine re-
spect for each other, we would allow ourselves to be at
loggerheads, that much more fiercely, over trifles. What
struck me as particularly amusing was my defense of
the state of bachelorhood to her, the woman to whom I

176 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
would have offered my life in marriage only a short
while before. I was even able to tease her about her
husband, who was a thoroughly decent fellow and
proud of his clever wife.

Underneath, my old love for her burned. However,
the old flame was now replaced by the glow of lasting
embers that keep the heart young and before which a
confirmed bachelor can warm his hands occasionally
on winter nights. Since Boppi had become my friend
and I was aware of his constant and honest affection
for me, I could safely let my old love linger as a part of
my youth and poetry. Besides, every so often Elizabeth's
cattiness cooled me off and made me feel grateful for
my bachelorhood.

After Boppi and I began to live together, I neglected
Elizabeth’s house more and more. I read books with
Boppi, leafed through travel albums and diaries, and
played dominoes. To liven things up a bit, we even
bought a poodle. We watched the first signs of winter
through our window and each day engaged in clever
conversations and silly ones. The invalid had acquired
an exalted view of the world, a pragmatic attitude en-
riched by kindness and humor, from which I learned
something every day. When it snowed and winter un-
folded its pure loveliness outside the window, we would
sit inside by the stove and fashion a safe cocoon for

( 177



PETER CAMENZIND
ourselves. The fine art of observing mankind, which
hitherto had cost me so many miles on foot, I now
pursued effortlessly at Boppi’s side. For Boppi, a quiet
and acute observer, was filled with pictures of his
previous surroundings and, once he got started, could
tell marvelous stories. During his entire existence he
had probably known no more than three dozen people
and had never been part of the mainstream of life, yet
he knew life much more accurately than I, for he was
accustomed to noticing even the smallest details and
finding in every person a source of experience, joy, and
understanding.

The pleasure we derived from animals continued to
provide our favorite amusement. Now that we could not
visit the zoo, we invented stories and fables about them.
We did not tell each other the stories; they developed
spontaneously in the form of dialogues. For example, a
declaration of love between two parrots, a family of
bisons quarreling, or evening conversations among the
boars.

“How're things, Mr. Marten?”

“So-so, Mr. Fox. You will remember the time I was
captured and lost my beloved wife, Bush Tail was her
name as I've had the pleasure of informing you pre-
viously. A pearl of a girl, I can assure you . . .”

“Oh, neighbor, forget all those old stories. You must
have talked about this pearl business a hundred times.

178 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
My God, we've only one life and we don’t want to spoil
the few pleasures we have left by being sentimental.”

“As you like, Mr. Fox. But if you’d known my wife,
you wouldn’t dare talk like that.”

“Of course, of course. So she was called Bush Tail,
right? A fine name, something you can caress! But
what I really wanted to say is this: have you noticed
how the sparrows are plaguing us again? I've got a little
plan.

“For the sparrows?”

“Yes, it's designed for the sparrows. Look—this, I
think, will be our best strategy. We'll put some bread in
front of the bars, lie down, and wait quietly for the little
beggars. I'll be surprised if we don’t catch one of them
that way. What do you think?”

“An excellent idea, neighbor.”

“Would you be so good as to put a little bread right
over there? Yes, that’s fine. But perhaps you ought to
push it a little to the right, then we'll both have a
chance when they come. Pay attention now. We'll lie

down fiat, close our eyes . . . but, hush, there’s one
homing in on us now.” ( Pause. )

“Well, Mr. Fox, nothing so far?”

“How impatient you are! As if this were the first time
you've hunted! A hunter's main asset is the ability to
wait and wait and wait again. Once more now!”

“Well, where’s that bread gone to?”

( 179



PETER CAMENZIND

“Pardon me?”

“The bread, it’s gone!”

“Well, Ill be . . . Now, really! The bread? Indeed,
it’s gonel Well, I'll be damned. It must be the wind
again.”

“Well, I have an idea I heard you chewing something
a while back.”

“What? Me chewing?”

“The bread, obviously!”

“Your accusations are becoming insulting, Marten.
One has to accept a harsh remark or two from a
neighbor, but that’s going too far! I repeat, too far! Do
you understand? So I’m supposed to have eaten the
bread? What's the big idea? First I have to listen to that
insipid story about your pearly Bush Tail for the thou-
sandth time, then I have the brilliant notion of putting
the bait outthere .. .”

“But that was mine! That was my bread!”

“. . . putting the bait out there. I lie down and
watch. Everything is going fine, then you start your
chatter, the sparrows fly off, the hunt is ruined, and
now I’m even accused of eating the bread. Well, I de-
clare! You can wait until hell freezes over before I
speak another word to you.”

Thus our afternoons and evenings passed swiftly and
easily. I was in the best of spirits, enjoyed my work, and
was surprised that I had been so lazy, discontented, and

180 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
sluggish before. Even the best times with Richard were
no match for these quiet, cheerful days when the snow-
flakes danced outside the window and we and our
poodle huddled around the stove.

And then my beloved Boppi had to commit his first,
and last, act of stupidity. In my content, I was inatten-
tive and did not notice that Boppi was experiencing
more pain than usual. He, however, out of sheer mod-
esty and affection, assumed a more cheerful air than
ever, never uttered a single complaint, did not even ask
me not to smoke, and then lay in bed at night suffering,
coughing, and groaning softly. Quite by chance, as I
was writing late one night in the next room, when he
thought I had gone to sleep, I heard him groan. The
poor fellow was thunderstruck when I entered the
room, lamp in hand. I put the lamp down and sat next
to him on the bed and conducted an inquisition. For a
time he tried to evade the issue.

“It isn’t all that bad,” he said finally, with some hesi-
tation. “Only a tightness around the heart when I move
in a certain way, and sometimes also when I breathe.”

He was literally apologizing, as though his illness
were a crime.

Next morning I went to see a doctor. It was a clear,
ice-cold day and my anxiety lessened as I walked. I even
thought of Christmas and what I might get Boppi. I
found the doctor at home and he came at once. We

( 181



PETER CAMENZIND
drove to my place in his comfortable carriage, walked
up the stairs, entered Boppi’s room, and the doctor
began his soundings and auscultations. As his voice
became more serious and kinder, all my optimism left
me.

Gout, a weak heart, a serious case. I listened and
wrote everything down and was surprised to find my-
self making no objection when the doctor ordered
Boppi’s transfer to the hospital.

The ambulance came in the afternoon. When I re-
turned from the hospital, I felt ghastly in the apart-
ment, with the poodle pressing against me, the invalid’s
big chair set to one side, and the next room empty.

That's the way it is when you love. It makes you
suffer, and I have suffered much in the years since. But
it matters little that you suffer, so long as you feel alive
with a sense of the close bond that connects all living
things, so long as love does not die! I would gladly ex-
change every happy day of my life, all my infatuations
and great plans, provided I could exchange them for
gazing deeply once more into this most sacred experi-
ence. It bitterly hurts your eyes and heart, and your
pride and self-esteem don't get off scot-free either, but
afterwards you feel so calm and serene, so much wiser
and alive.

Little fair-haired Aggie had taken one part of my old
self with her into the grave. Now I saw my dear hunch-

182 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

back, whom I had given all my love and with whom I
had shared my whole life, suffer and die bit by bit. I
suffered with him and partook of all the terror and
sanctity of death. I was still an apprentice in the ars
amandi and now I had one of my first sad lessons in
the ars moriendi. I will not be silent about this period of
my life, as I was about my days in Paris. I want to
speak loud and clear about it—like a woman about her
honeymoon or an old man about his boyhood.

I watched a man die whose entire life had consisted
of love and pain. I listened to him make jokes like a
child, while death was at work in him. I saw his pained
eyes seek out mine, not to beg for pity but to strengthen
me and to show me that his pain and agonies had not
touched the best in him. At those moments his eyes
grew wide. You no longer saw his withered face, only
the glow in his eyes.

“Is there anything I can do for you, Boppi?”

“Tell me something. Talk about the tapir.”

So I talked about the tapir. He closed his eyes and I
found it difficult to speak normally, because I was so
close to tears. And when I thought he was no longer
listening or had fallen asleep, I would stop. Then he
would open his eyes again.

“And what happened then . . . ?”

And I went on telling him about the tapir, the poodle,

( 183



PETER CAMENZIND
my father, about wicked little Matteo Spinelli, or about
Elizabeth.

“Yes, she married the wrong man. That’s the way it
goes, Peter.”

Often, he would suddenly start talking about dying.

“It's no fun, Peter. Nothing in the world is as difficult
as dying. But still you manage it.”

Or: “I'll actually have reason to laugh, once this
torture is over. Dying is really worth it in my case. I'll
be getting rid of a hunched back, a clubfoot, and a stiff
hip. It'll be a pity when you die—with your broad
shoulders and fine, strong legs.”

And once, in his last days, he woke from a brief sleep
and said, quite loudly: “The priests’ heaven doesn’t
exist. Heaven is far more beautiful than that. Far
more.”

The carpenter's wife visited him often and was kind
and helpful in a sensible way. To my deep regret, the
carpenter himself did not come even once.

“What do you think, Boppi?” I would ask him. “Will
there be a tapir in heaven, too?”

“Oh, definitely,” he said, and nodded. “There’s every
kind of animal there, even the chamois!”

Christmas came and we had a little celebration at his
bedside. A cold wave set in, then a thaw, then fresh
snow covered the slippery streets, but I did not really
see any of it. I heard, and immediately forgot, that

184 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

Elizabeth had given birth to a son. An amusing letter
from Signora Nardini arrived; I read it quickly and put
it aside. I finished my work in brief, frantic bursts,
always aware that each hour I worked was that much
less time spent with Boppi. Then I rushed to the hos-
pital, where I would find an atmosphere of serene calm.
And I would sit for half a day by Boppi’s bed, enveloped
in a deep, dreamlike peace.

Shortly before he died, he had a few days when
he felt better. It was remarkable how the immediate
past seemed to have been blotted out in his memory: he
lived entirely in his early years. For two days he spoke
only of his mother. He could not talk for long at a time,
but it was obvious even in the hour-long pauses that he
was thinking of her.

“I’ve told you far too little about her,” he said sadly.
“You mustn't forget what I tell you about her; otherwise
there'll soon be no one left to remember her and be
grateful to her. You see, Peter, it would be a wonderful
thing if everyone had a mother like that. She did not
have me put in an institution when I couldn’t work any
longer.”

He lay there, breathing with difficulty. An hour
passed, then he continued.

“She loved me best of all her children and kept me
with her until she died. My brothers emigrated and my
sister married the carpenter, but I stayed at home. As

( 185



PETER CAMENZIND
poor as my mother was, she never held it against me.
You mustn't forget my mother, Peter. She was very
tiny, even smaller than I perhaps. When she put her
hand in mine, it was just as if a tiny bird had perched
on it. ‘A child’s coffin will be large enough for her,’
that’s what neighbor Riitiman said when she died.”

He would fit in a child's coffin too. He lay small and
shrunken in his clean hospital bed, and his hands now
looked like those of a languishing woman, long, slen-
der, white, and a little gnarled. When he stopped day-
dreaming of his mother, he became preoccupied with
me. He talked about me as if I were not there beside
him.

“He's not had much luck, of course, but it didn’t
really do him any harm. His mother died too early.”

“Don’t you recognize me any longer, Boppi?”

“Yes, Herr Camenzind,” he said jokingly, and
laughed very softly.

The last day, he asked: “Listen, is it very expensive
to be in the hospital? It could get to be too expensive.”

But he did not expect a reply. A delicate blush spread
over his wan face, he closed his eyes and for a while
looked supremely happy.

“He is approaching the end,” said the nurse.

But he opened his eyes once more, gave me a roguish
look, and moved his eyebrows as if trying to reassure
me. I stood up, placed my hand under his left shoulder,

186 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
and lifted him a little, which always afforded him some
relief. Leaning against my hand, he let his lips twist
once more briefly in pain, then he tumed his head a
little and shuddered, as though suddenly cold. That was
his deliverance.

“Is it all right this way?” I asked him still. But he was
free of all suffering. It was one o'clock in the afternoon
of the seventh of January. Toward evening we made
everything ready. The tiny misshapen body lay peaceful
and clean, without further distortion, until it came time
for him to be taken away to be buried. During the next
two days I was amazed to find myself neither particu-
larly sad nor distressed. I did not weep once. J had
experienced parting and separation so deeply during his
illness that I had little feeling left now. My grief sub-
sided slowly as I regained my balance.

Still, it seemed a good moment to leave town quietly
and find a place somewhere, if possible in the south,
to rest and take up the loosely woven threads of my
long poem and tighten them on the loom. I still had a
little money, so I was able to put off my various literary
commitments. I prepared to pack and leave with the
first signs of spring. First I would go to Assisi, where
Signora Nardini was expecting me. Then I intended to
retreat to a quiet mountain hamlet for a stint of good,
hard work. It seemed to me that I'd seen enough of life
and death now to allow me to presume that people

( 187



PETER CAMENZIND
would listen to me if I decided to hold forth on these
subjects. Impatiently I waited for March and in antici-
pation my ears hummed with earthy Italian expres-
sions, and my nose tingled with the aroma of risotto,
oranges and Chianti. My plan seemed flawless; the
more I thought about it, the better I liked it. However, I
did well to savor the Chianti in my imagination, for
everything turned out differently.

In February a troubled, fantastically phrased letter
from innkeeper Nydegger announced that there had
been a heavy snowfall and that something was wrong
in the village, with animals as well as people. My
father’s condition being particularly doubtful, all in all
it would be a good thing if I could send some money, or
best of all could come myself. Because sending money
was not convenient for me and because I was worried
about the old man, I had no choice but to go home. I
arrived on a thoroughly unpleasant day. On account of
the snow and wind, I could make out neither mountains
nor houses. I was Jucky that I knew my way about so
well I could have found my house blindfolded.

Old Camenzind was not bedridden, as J had ex-
pected. He sat miserable and meek by the stove, be-
sieged by a neighbor woman who had brought him
milk and took the opportunity to lecture him thor-
oughly and at length on his evil ways, something my
arrival did not interrupt.

188 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

“Look, Peter’s back,” announced the hoary sinner,
winking at me with his left eye.

But she went right on with her sermon. I sat down
on a chair, waiting for her attack of excessive neigh-
borliness to subside, though she made several points in
her harangue which it would have done me no harm to
pursue. But I just sat there, watching the snow melt on
my coat and boots, and form a moist patch, then a little
pool, around my chair. Not until the woman was done
did we celebrate our reunion officially. The woman
joined in amiably and with surprising good grace.

My father had grown much weaker. I thought back
on my previous attempt to care for him. Apparently it
was no help to leave him alone as I had done; the prob-
lem of caring for him had now become more serious
and urgent than ever.

After all, you can’t expect a gnarled old farmer who
was no model of virtue even during his best days to
become meek in his dotage or be deeply moved by the
sudden spectacle of filial love. And that, of course, was
about the last thing my father was going to let happen.
Yet the feebler he became, the more loathsome he was.
He paid me back for all I ever made him suffer, if not
with interest at least in full and equal measure. He was
sparing and cautious with remarks addressed to me,
but he had access to numerous more drastic measures
when disgruntled or bitter—he did not need to say a
single word. There were moments when I wondered

( 189



PETER CAMENZIND
whether I, too, would turn into such a grouchy crank in
my old age. My father’s drinking days, however, were
virtually over. The glass of good southern wine I poured
for him twice a day he enjoyed with ill grace, because I
always took the bottle right back down to the cellar and
never entrusted him with the key.

Not until the end of February did we have those
luminous weeks that make winter in the high Alps such
a marvelous spectacle. The high, snow-covered moun-
tains stood out clearly against the cornflower-blue sky
and seemed improbably close in the clear air. Meadows
and slopes lay covered with that winter mountain snow
which is white, grainy, and dry as no snow ever is in
the lowland valleys. The sun glistened at noon on
swells in the ground. In the hollows and along the
slopes lay rich blue shadows. After weeks of snow-
storms the air was so clean that each breath was ex-
hilarating. Children were sledding down some of the
less formidable slopes, and between noon and one
o'clock you could see the old people standing in
the street treating themselves to some sun. At night the
rafters creaked with the frost. Amid the snowfields lay
the tranquil blue lake that never freezes, looking lovelier
than it ever did in summer.

Each day before lunch I would help my father out of
the house and watch him stretch his brown, gnarled
hands in the sun. After a while he would begin to cough

1g0 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

and complain that he felt chilly. This was one of his
harmless tricks for getting me to fetch him a glass of
schnapps, for neither cough nor chill could be taken
seriously. Thus he received a small glass of gentian
schnapps or absinthe. In artfully graduated steps he
ceased coughing as he secretly congratulated himself
on having outwitted me once again. After lunch I would
leave him, strap on my leggings, and climb up into the
mountains for a few hours, going as high as the time
allowed, then return by way of a fruit sack I'd taken
along, sitting on it and tobogganing home across slop-
ing fields of snow.

By the time I had intended to set out for Assisi, the
snow was still several feet deep. In April, spring finally
began to make itself felt, bringing with it a thaw as
swift and dangerous as any our village had experienced
for years. Day and night you could hear the Fohn howl,
distant avalanches crash, and the embittered roar of
torrents carrying boulders and splintered trees, hurling
them on our narrow strips of land and orchards. The
Fohn fever would not let me sleep. Night after night,
rapt and fearful I heard the storm moan, the ava-
lanches thunder, the raging water of the lake burst
against the shore.

During this period of feverish springtime battles, I
was once more overcome by my old love sickness, so
impetuously this time that I got up at night, leaned out

( 191



PETER CAMENZIND

the window, and bellowed words of Jove out into the
storm to Elizabeth. Since that warm night when I
had gone mad with love on the hill above Erminia’s
house, passion had not possessed me as horribly and
irresistibly as this. It seemed to me often as if the
beautiful woman were standing very close, smiling at
me, yet withdrawing with each step I took in her direc-
tion. All my thoughts invariably returned to this image.
Like an infected man, I could not help scratching the
itching sore. I was ashamed of myself, but this was as
agonizing as it was futile. I damned the Foéhn, but all
my agonies were accompanied secretly by the half-
hidden warmth of lust, as I had felt it during my boy-
hood longing for Rési Girtanner. The dark warm wave
of passion flooded over me.

I realized that this malady was incurable and tried to
do a little work at least. I drew up a master plan and
drafted several preliminary studies, but soon I saw that
this was not the right time. Meanwhile, ominous re-
ports of the Féhn were coming in from all quarters and
the village itself was badly stricken. Dams along the
raging brooks broke; houses, barns, and stables were
heavily damaged; and several families in outlying dis-
tricts, deprived of any shelter, sought refuge with us.
Everywhere there was lamentation and distress and
nowhere was there any money. It was my good fortune
that the mayor asked me to his office to see if I would be

192 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

willing to join the relief committee. He felt confident
that I would be able to represent the village successfully
before the cantonal government and arouse the rest of
the country with newspaper articles asking for help and
money. The request came just at the right moment, for
it suited me to be able to forget my own unproductive
suffering by engaging in more serious and worthwhile
affairs. So I threw myself into the cause with all my
heart. By means of a few letters, I quickly found several
people in Basel willing to collect money for us. The
cantonal government, as we knew, had no funds and
only sent a few people to help us. Then I turned to the
newspapers, with reports and demands: letters, contri-
butions, and inquiries poured in. In addition to attend-
ing to this massive correspondence, I had to contend
with the hard-nosed farmers who served on the com-
munity council.

These few weeks of disciplined, strenuous work were
very good for me. By the time the operation was run-
ning fairly smoothly and my services were less neces-
sary, the meadows were turning green all around us,
and the lake again reflected sun and snow-free slopes.

My father was a little improved and my love sickness
had disappeared like the soiled remains of an avalanche.
This was the time of year when my father used to
repair his boat, while Mother watched from the garden,
and I too watched, my eyes trained on his agile hands,

( 193



PETER CAMENZIND
on the smoke curling from his pipe, and on the yellow
butterflies. Now there was no boat in need of a paint
job, Mother had died long ago, and my father huddled
moodily in our derelict house.

Uncle Konrad also reminded me of the old days.
Sometimes, without Father seeing us, I would take him
to the inn for a glass of wine and listen to him rem-
inisce with good-humored laughter, and not without
pride, about his many ventures. He no longer engaged
in adventures, and old age had left its mark on him in
other ways too, though his face and laugh still had a
certain boyishness that always pleased me. Often, when
I became fed up with my father, he was my sole con-
solation and amusement. When I took him to the inn
for a glass of wine, he trotted by my side and tried his
best to keep his thin, crooked legs in step with mine.

“Hoist your sails, Uncle Konrad,” I would say en-
couragingly, and at the word “sail” we invariably be-
gan to discuss our old boat, now gone, mourning it like
a lost friend. As I had been fond of the old wreck and
missed it, we dredged up all the stories about it in great
detail.

The lake was as blue as ever, the sun no less festive
and warm. Older by so many years, I often contem-
plated the yellow butterflies with a feeling that had
changed very little. Couldn’t I lie down in the meadows
again and abandon myself to dreams? That this was no

194 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

longer possible became obvious to me whenever I
washed: I saw my face with its prominent nose and
sour mouth smiling back at me out of the rusty wash-
basin. Camenzind Senior made even more certain that I
would make no mistake about the way times had
changed. If I wanted to be transported into the present,
all I needed to do was open the tightly-wedged table
drawer in my room, where my future work lay slumber-
ing, a package of outdated sketches and six or seven
drafts on quarto sheets. But I opened this drawer only
rarely.

Besides caring for the old man, I had my hands full
with our decrepit house. There were gaping holes in the
floorboards, oven and stove were defective, smoke filled
the rooms with acrid stench, the doors would not shut
properly, and the ladder to the loft, once the scene of
my father’s chastisements, was a danger to life and
limb. Before I could undertake any repairs, I had to
have the ax ground, the saw sharpened, borrow a
hammer, and find some nails. The next problem was to
fashion usable pieces of wood from the remains of our
rotting stock. Uncle Konrad lent a hand with repairing
the tools and the old grindstone, yet he was too old and
bent to be of much use. So I tore my tissue-soft writer's
hands on the splintery wood, worked the wobbly grind-
stone treadle, clambered over the leaky roof, nailed,
hammered, cut the tiles, and whittled away. During all

( 195



PETER CAMENZIND

this I lost a considerable portion of my excess weight.
At times, especially while wearily patching the roof, I
would suddenly come to a halt, the hammer in midair,
and sit down to take a pull on my half-extinguished
cigar and gaze into the deep blue sky. I savored my
idleness, glad that my father could no longer goad me
or find fault. If neighbors happened to pass by, women,
old men, or schoolchildren, I would amplify my inac-
tivity by engaging them in neighborly chats. Gradually I
earned the reputation of being someone you could talk
to sensibly.

“It’s warm, Lizbeth, isn’t it?”

“Right you are, Peter. What’s that you're doing?”

“Patching the old roof.”

“Can't do it any harm. It’s been needing it for so long
now.”

“Right you are, Lizbeth.”

“What's the old man up to these days? He must be
seventy if he’s a day.”

“Eighty, Lizbeth, eighty it is. What do you think itll
be like when we're as old as that? It’s no fun.”

“Right you are, Peter. But I’ve got to get on now.
My man wants his lunch. Take care now.”

“Bye now, Lizbeth.”

And as she walked on with her lunch basket, I blew
smoke clouds in the air, followed her with my eyes, and
wondered how it was that everyone else accomplished

196 )



CHAPTER EIGHT

so much while I had been hammering away at the same
plank for two full days. But finally the roof was
patched. For once, my father took an interest, and as I
couldn’t hoist him up to the roof, I had to produce a
detailed account of every board I had replaced. It didn’t
really matter that I exaggerated a little.

“That’s fine,” my father conceded. “That's fine, but I
never would have believed you'd get it done this year.”

When I reflect on all my journeys and efforts to live,
I am both pleased and annoyed to have proved the old
adage that “fish belong in the water, farmers on the
land.” No amount of art will transform a Camenzind
from Nimikon into a city dweller. It is a situation to
which I am becoming accustomed, and I am glad that
my clumsy pursuit of luck has Jed me back, against my
will, to the old nook between lake and mountains where
I started, and where the virtues and vices, especially the
latter, are the normal, traditional ones. In the world
outside I had forgotten what it was like at home and
had come very near to regarding myself as some rare
and remarkable bird. Now I saw once again that it was
merely the spirit of Nimikon spooking about inside me,
unable to adjust to the customs of the rest of the world.
Here in my village, no one thinks of me as out-of-the-
ordinary. When I look at my father, or at Uncle Kon-
rad, I feel myself to be a very normal son and nephew.

( 197



PETER CAMENZIND

My few flings in the realm of intellect, and the so-called
world of culture, can be compared to my uncle's
famous sailing episode—except that they cost me more
in money, effort, and precious years. My appearance
too, now that Cousin Kuoni trims my beard and I walk
around again in lederhosen and rolled-up sleeves, has
become completely native. When I am old and gray, I
will take my father’s place and play his small role in
village life and no one will notice. People know only
that I was away for many years. I take great care not
to tell them what a miserable life I led then, and how
often I got stuck—otherwise they'd have a nickname
for me in no time at all. Whenever I tell any of them
about Germany, Italy, or Paris, I boast a little. Some-
times I begin to doubt my own veracity even in the well-
remembered parts of my stories.

What, then, is the upshot of so many blind voyages
and wasted years? The woman I loved and still Jove is
rearing her two beautiful children in Basel. The other
woman, who loved me, has found consolation and
carries on her fruit, vegetable, and seed trade. My
father, for whose sake I returned to this God-forsaken
haven, has neither deteriorated completely nor recov-
ered, but sits opposite me on his bed of sloth, gazing at
me. He envies me the possession of the cellar key.

But of course that isn’t everything. Apart from my
mother and my drowned friend Richard, I have blond

198 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
Aggie and my little hunchback Boppi as angels in
heaven. I have seen the houses repaired in the village
and the dikes mended. If I wanted to, I could join the
community council—but there are enough Camenzinds
there as it is.

Recently an entirely new possibility has turned up in
my life. Innkeeper Nydegger, in whose inn my father
and I drank so many liters of Veltliner, Valais, and
Vaud, is going downhill rapidly and no longer enjoys his
trade. He complained to me about his troubles just the
other day. The worst of it is, if no one from the village
buys the inn, the outside brewery will, and that would
be the end of it and we would be without a comfortable
table. Some outside tenant would be installed who'd
prefer serving beer to wine, naturally, and under whose
mismanagement the good Nydegger wine-cellar would
be adulterated and spoiled. I haven’t stopped worrying
since I found this out. I still have a little money left in
my account in Basel and I wouldn't be the worst suc-
cessor old Nydegger could find. The only hitch is that I
would not like to become an innkeeper while my father
is still alive. For not only would I be unable to keep the
old man from drinking, but he would be triumphant:
with all my studying and Latin, I'd have ended up as
the Nimikon innkeeper. That would not do at all, and
so I am marking time until my old man passes on—not
impatiently, mind you, only for the sake of the cause.

( 199



PETER CAMENZIND

After many quiet, drowsy years, Uncle Konrad is
again thirsting for adventure, and I don’t like it at all.
He goes about with a finger in his mouth, his forehead
wrinkled in thought, strides around his room with quick
little steps and, when the weather is good, peers across
the lake. “I’m beginning to think he wants to build boats
again,” remarked his wife, Cenzine. Indeed, Konrad
looks livelier and more daring than he has for years,
with such a sly, superior look, as if he knew exactly
what he was doing this time. But I don’t believe there’s
anything to it. Most likely, it is just his tired soul long-
ing for wings to take it homeward soon. Time to put on
sails, old uncle! But once that time arrives, the people
of Nimikon will be treated to an unheard-of spectacle.
For I have decided that when Uncle Konrad’s life has
ended, I myself shall say a few words at his graveside,
something unknown in these parts. I will commemo-
rate him as a blessed and beloved son of God, and
follow this edifying part with a good handful of acid
remarks for the beloved mourners, remarks they will
neither forget nor want to forgive for some time to
come. I hope my father will be around to witness the
occasion.

And in my drawer lie the beginnings of my great
work. “My Life’s Work” I might call it—but that sounds
too pretentious. I'd rather not call it that, because, I
must confess, its continuation and conclusion seem

200 )



CHAPTER EIGHT
highly doubtful. Perhaps a time will come when Ill
start all over again and see it through to the end. In
that case, the yearning of my youth will be proved
right, and I will turn out to be a poet after all.

This would mean as much, or perhaps more, to me
than being a village councilor—or the builder of the
stone dams. Yet it could never mean as much to me as
the years of my youth that are gone but not lost, or as
much as the memory of all those beloved people, from
slender Rési Girtanner to poor Boppi.

( 201



